The field efficacy of a bait containing phloxine B, uranine and Provesta 621 protein was tested against Mediterranean fruit fly (Ceratitis capitata; Medfly) by aerial and ground spraying in about 84 ha of coffee fields in Kauai, Hawaii, USA. Concurrently, soil and crop samples were collected from the aerially sprayed field and its unsprayed control field for residue studies. Efficacy of the sprays was assessed through trapping with both protein‐baited and trimedlure‐baited traps and through the infestation level of coffee cherries collected at least three‐quarters ripe. The C capitata population was low at the start of the aerial and ground spray studies, but dramatically increased in the control fields. This increase coincided with initial ripening of coffee cherries. During times of peak population levels, C capitata populations were reduced by more than 91% in the ground‐sprayed field and 99% in the aerial‐sprayed field, relative to the populations in their respective control fields and based on protein‐baited trap catches. Results of residue analyses indicated that uranine dissipated quickly compared with phloxine B on coffee and soil. Coffee samples collected at pre‐spray periods had phloxine B residues of 7.2–25.5 ng g−1 on berries. Phloxine B concentrations were much higher on coffee leaves (163–1120 ng g−1). Lower concentrations of the dye were found from coffee samples collected during rainy days. Average phloxine B concentrations immediately after spraying were 56 and 2840 ng g−1 in coffee berries and leaves, respectively. Dissipation of phloxine B on berries was fast, with a half‐life (t1/2) of 3 days. Dissipation of phloxine B on leaves was fitted to two linear phases: the initial (0–4 days) with a shorter t1/2 of 3 days and the later phase (4–28 days) with a longer t1/2 of 15 days. Average concentrations of phloxine B in the top soil ranged from 50 to 590 ng g−1 at pre‐spray. Phloxine B initial concentration (770 ng g−1) reached a plateau immediately after the last spraying, but showed a steady decline over time with t1/2 of 16 days. Fast dissipation of the dyes in the field indicates that these chemicals may be environmentally compatible and therefore a promising alternative for fruit fly control.