2019-10-19
https://www.outlookindia.com/website/story/india-news-outlook-speakout-2019-live-updates/340764
One of the most anticipated event, where Ideas and Action connect, Passion and Purpose collide, Thoughtful and Authentic voices converse: Outlook SpeakOut 2019 is here.

The theme of this year's event is What Women Want. The event will see 15 women discuss and debate women's right to be safe, secure and healthy. We also have among us Smriti Zubin Irani, Union Minister of Women & Child Development and Textiles.

Below are the live updates:

7:57: "It is important to question the male authority over religion,"says Zakia Soman

7:54: "We need to burst the hoax of patriarchy masquerading as religion,"says Zakia Soman

7:53: "As a Muslim woman who has fought the menace of triple talaq, you come face to face with patriarchy masquerading at religion,"says Zakia Soman

7:51pm: "We all know that we live in a patriarchal world and the male domination has reduced women to being some kind of inferior beings," says Zakia Soman

7:49pm: "Go out in the world, ladies, young girls; go out fully loaded, know this is your weapon. For while men still own the world, it is women and the period that ensures there is one at all," says Advaita Kala

7:40pm: "If we want to talk about menstruation, the subject is menstrual health, not menstrual hygiene," says Sinu Jospeh

7:37pm: " We have created more myths than what we tried to break on menstruation," says Sinu Joseph.

7:16pm: "If any gender needs to understand what women want, it is the men," says Khushbu Sundar.

7:15pm: "If we have to fight, fight it out. If you have to protest, protest. It's okay. We are a country who achieved freedom after fighting. It's okay to fight for what we want," says Khushbu Sundar.

7:13pm: "We women have to get hold of ourselves first. We have to understand that men are not above us," says Khushbu Sundar.

7:10pm : "The attitude of men that they earn and think of women as meek needs to change. We talk about gender equality. I say women are superior to men. We are super women," says Khushbu Sundar.

7:07pm: "We associate the phrase 'Breaking the Glass Ceiling' only with women. We don't talk about men when it comes to this notion," says Khushbu Sundar.

7:05 pm: 'Everywhere there are women who are treated as outcast. We need to take a stand for ourselves," says Khushbu Sundar, actor-turned-politican.

7:00 pm: In its scope, it is a continuation, or the logical extension, of last year's theme: Women Empowerment. As in the past.... we have a refreshing galaxy of minds today...... to debate openly and thoroughly the great issue of the day, says Indranil Roy, CEO, The Outlook Group.

6: 59pm: Women are waging a battle to reclaim their future: public space to workplace, the freedom to wear anything, do anything, be anything, says Indranil Roy, CEO, The Outlook Group.

6:57pm: In the last few years, sexual assault and women's empowerment movements have upended public conversation about women's issues in India and the world, says Indranil Roy, CEO, The Outlook Group.

6:50pm: We begin the event by an amazing performance by musical group Maati Baani

6:40 PM:

6:30 PM:

6:00pm:
