Building dampness in the floor construction is known to cause chemical degradation of polyvinyl chloride floor coatings, but few epidemiological studies on this topic have been published. Another topic of interest is the different symptoms in different buildings constructed with different building materials and with different architectural designs. The term Sick Building Syndrome (SBS) is sometimes used to describe irritation to the eyes, skin, and upper airways, headache and fatigue in relation to the indoor environment. The aim of our investigation was to study symptoms in relation to building dampness and type of building in geriatric hospitals. Four hospitals for geriatrics were selected to represent buildings with different ages and design, irrespectively of symptom prevalence. All staff (n = 95) were requested to answer a medical questionnaire, 88 (93%) participated. Measurements of room temperature, relative air humidity, air flow rate, illumination, moulds, bacteria, formaldehyde and other volatile compounds, respirable dust, carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, nitrogen dioxide and ozone were carried out in all buildings. Statistical analyses were performed by bivariate analysis, and multiple logistic regression, adjusting for possible influence of building age, age of the subjects, gender, tobacco smoke, atopy and the perceived psychosocial work environment. Dampness in the upper concrete floor surface (75–84%), ammonia under the floor [3 parts per million (3 ppm)], and 2‐ethyl‐1‐hexanol in the air were detected in two buildings built in 1985 and 1993. Increased occurrence of ocular, nasal and throat symptoms, and dry facial skin were found in the damp buildings. Those in the specially designed building had fewer of these symptoms. In conclusion, the study provides new evidence on possible health effects of dampness‐related alkaline degradation of di(2‐ethyl‐hexyl) phthalate (DEPH) in PVC‐building material. Emissions related to degradation of DEPH due to dampness in the floor construction, detected by an increase of 2‐ethyl‐1‐hexanol in the air, seems to increase the occurrence of ocular, nasal, throat and facial skin symptoms. The indoor environment of one specially designed building with a high ceiling and avoidance of fluorescent lighting and interior plastic materials, seemed to have a positive influence on well‐being. Our results support the view that building dampness should be avoided, and shows that it is possible to construct a new building where the inhabitants have few symptoms. Copyright © 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.