The green anole lizard exhibits seasonal courtship behavior that is sexually dimorphic. This courtship consists of the extension of a bright red throat fan (dewlap) associated with head‐bobbing display behavior. While males extend their dewlaps in aggressive encounters as well as in courtship, females use their considerably smaller dewlaps much less frequently and mainly in agonistic encounters. In parallel, a number of components of the neuromuscular system controlling dewlap extension are greater in males than in females during the breeding season, including dewlap motoneuron soma size and muscle fiber size and number. These features do not seem to change substantially in adulthood, despite a dramatic decline in dewlap use during the nonbreeding season. We explored the morphology of this neuromuscular system in more detail in the present experiment in males and females during both the breeding and nonbreeding seasons. Fiber and whole muscle length (approximately perpendicular to the fibers) were measured. Acetylcholinesterase histochemistry was used to visualize neuromuscular junctions (NMJs), and the surface area and density of NMJs were assessed for each animal. During the breeding season, NMJ size was larger in males than in females, but NMJ density along each fiber was equivalent between the sexes. In addition, whole muscle length and that of individual muscle fibers, was larger in males than in females. However, when corrected for body size, the sex difference in muscle fiber length disappeared. In the nonbreeding season, the sexual dimorphisms were maintained, suggesting that these features do not change substantially due to differences in circulating testosterone or a difference in use across seasons. Overall, these results are consistent with the idea that enhanced NMJ size is a relatively stable feature of the dewlap muscle in adulthood that either facilitates or is a consequence of using a larger muscle to extend a bigger dewlap in males compared to females. © 2002 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Neurobiol 50: 24–30, 2002