2019-10-16
https://www.stuff.co.nz/sport/rugby/rugby-world-cup/rwc-2019-japan/116652334/all-blacks-v-ireland-irish-battle-plan-laid-bare--and-its-basic
Ireland boast a winning record over the All Blacks in the past few years.

Ireland will need to "frustrate the hell out of New Zealand" if they are to win their Rugby World Cup quarter-final in Japan.

That's the view of former Irish centre Gordon D'Arcy who has laid down his battle plan for Joe Schmidt's team in a passionate column for the Irish Times.

Do the basics, work hard at negating the All Blacks' individual brilliance and starve them of possession - that's it in a nutshell, according to 83-test star D'Arcy who noted this sort of philosophy had been at the heart of Ireland's two historic wins in 2016 and 2018.

"The task of beating New Zealand is enormous. Each defeat is a game for the ages," D'Arcy wrote in his column in the Irish Times on Thursday (NZT).

* Haka 'insulting', but Irish will lose

* Are Japan the new tier one team?

* Kiwi coaches leading way at RWC

* AB loose forwards not rated

* Savea follows his brother at RWC

* Irish put heat on referee Owens

"How can it be done? Simple. You frustrate them to the point of error. Every man has his breaking point.

"If the whistle of (referee) Nigel Owens ... shrills on 80 minutes with big fat zeros beside the names of Beauden Barrett and Ardie Savea when it comes to offloading and line breaks, then victory will belong to Ireland.

"What needs to happen is Ireland must frustrate the hell out of New Zealand, imprint the word 'Ireland' in their psyche forever more, and that starts in the same place they hurt them in Chicago.

"Iain Henderson and James Ryan need to overshadow (Brodie) Retallick and (Sam) Whitelock. They must overpower two of the biggest and most powerful men to ever wear the black jersey.

"If Ireland are to smash the glass ceiling, the names Henderson and Ryan must ring out around the skinny alleyways of Shinjuku deep into Sunday morning."

D'Arcy felt there may be more relevance to Ireland's 2018 victory in Dublin than the shock in Chicago two years earlier.

In 2018 they had grown into a clinical team, winning a Six Nations grand slam that was capped by the gritty home win over New Zealand later in the year.

"In 2016, Ireland posted 40 points to beat them. Not sure this team can repeat those heights. It must be a different game. It must be a test match of messy, ridiculously high levels of intensity," D'Arcy wrote.

"Give New Zealand precisely what (coach Steve) Hansen is expecting ... no alarms and no surprise. Win it playing Schmidt's rugby. Starve them of possession. That is the only way."
