2019-10-16
https://www.stuff.co.nz/sport/rugby/rugby-world-cup/rwc-2019-japan/116643883/all-blacks-v-ireland-ireland-needs-to-frustrate-new-zealand-says-gordon-darcy
Ireland face an "enormous" task against New Zealand, says 83-cap former Irish centre Gordon D'Arcy.

D'Arcy says his country will have to remember their tactics from 2016, and frustrate the All Blacks to the point of error if they are to win in Saturday's quarterfinal.

"The task of beating New Zealand is enormous. Each defeat is a game for the ages," D'Arcy wrote in a column in the Irish Times.

"How can it be done? Simple. You frustrate them to the point of error. Every man has his breaking point. If the whistle of (referee) Nigel Owens ... shrills on 80 minutes with big fat zeros beside the names of Beauden Barrett and Ardie Savea when it comes to offloading and line breaks, then victory will belong to Ireland."

* All Blacks v Ireland: New Zealand must follow Japan's lead and embrace identity

* All Blacks: Zinzan Brooke fears Rugby World Cup semifinal against England

* All Blacks v Ireland: Joe Schmidt's plan revealed before Rugby World Cup clash

* All Blacks v Ireland: Conservative Irish written off for Rugby World Cup quarter-final

D'Arcy faced New Zealand six times as part of Ireland's squad, but never tasted victory.

If Ireland win on Saturday, they will advance to the semifinals of the Rugby World Cup for the first time.

D'Arcy said the team should look back to the tactics of 2016, when Ireland broke their 111-year drought against New Zealand in Chicago.

"In 2016, Ireland posted 40 points to beat them," he wrote. "Not sure this team can repeat those heights. It must be a different game. It must be a test match of messy, ridiculously high levels of intensity.

"Give New Zealand precisely what (coach Steve) Hansen is expecting ... no alarms and no surprise. Win it playing Schmidt's rugby. Starve them of possession. That is the only way."

Hansen previously said his side might be able to use Ireland coach Joe Schmidt's meticulous planning against him to "set him up".

D'Arcy said Ireland must "frustrate the hell out of New Zealand".

"Iain Henderson and James Ryan need to overshadow (Brodie) Retallick and (Sam) Whitelock. They must overpower two of the biggest and most powerful men to ever wear the black jersey.

"If Ireland are to smash the glass ceiling, the names Henderson and Ryan must ring out around the skinny alleyways of Shinjuku deep into Sunday morning."

Ireland will replace injured Sean Cronin with Ulster hooker Rob Herring ahead of the quarterfinal, according to reports.

The BBC reported that Herring is set to join Ireland's Rugby World Cup squad after Cronin was ruled out of the tournament after suffering an injury in training.

Herring, 29, has earned eight caps for Ireland since his debut in 2014.

Last month, Jordi Murphy replaced Leinster's Jack Conan, who sustained a foot injury in training.
