2019-10-19
https://www.bostonherald.com/2019/10/18/all-female-spacewalk-cause-for-cheers/
Make some room Nellie Bly, Amelia Earhart, Beryl Markham et al. The world's greatest female explorers have two new faces to celebrate today after Friday's historic first all-female spacewalk: NASA astronauts Jessica Meir -- a Maine native -- and Christina Koch spent hours replacing a broken part of the International Space Station's power grid. They didn't shatter a glass ceiling -- space has no ceiling -- but they inspired women and girls across the world with their efforts.

Women have been exploring pioneers for a long time -- albeit mostly on the ground. Bly was just 25 and a reporter for the New York World when she proposed a real-world emulation of Jules Verne's novel "Around the World in Eighty Days." Meeting Verne along the way, Bly departed New York in late 1889 and went through Europe, the Suez Canal, Hong Kong and Japan before reaching San Francisco on Jan. 21, 1890. Publisher Joseph Pulitzer chartered a private train to bring Bly home on Jan. 25, 1890. The circumnavigation beat Verne's story by eight days -- a world-record in the time before air travel or Google Maps.

The mystery of Earhart still intrigues the world. The famous flyer was attempting her own around-the-world trip when her plane disappeared over the Pacific Ocean in 1937.

Meir and Koch join a list of celestial achievers begun by two women from the Soviet Union. Valentina Tereshkova was the first, still the only solo space pilot in history, who circled the globe 48 times aboard the Vostok 6 at the tender age of 26 way back in 1963. The first female spacewalker was another Soviet, Svetlana Savitskaya, who performed the feat in 1983.

American women began their high flights with Sally Ride in 1984. Judith Resnik was the second female U.S. astronaut -- she died tragically aboard the space shuttle Challenger in 1986. Boston-born teacher Christa McAuliffe perished on the same ill-fated mission.

Kathryn Sullivan became the first American spacewalker in 1984. With Koch and Meir, 60 more women have slipped the surly bonds of earth since Sullivan's flight, including women from Canada, Japan, France, India, Iran, South Korea, China and Italy. Truly, the sky is no longer the limit.

Sullivan told The Associated Press this was just the latest step. "We've got qualified women running the control, running space centers, commanding the station, commanding spaceships and doing spacewalks," Sullivan said. "And golly, gee whiz, every now and then there's more than one woman in the same place."

Meir downplayed the event. "We don't want to take too much credit because there have been many others -- female spacewalkers -- before us. This is just the first time that there have been two women outside at the same time. ... For us, this is really just us doing our job."

Tracy Caldwell Dyson, a three-time spacewalker who looked on from Mission Control in Houston, added: "Hopefully, this will now be considered normal."
