2019-10-16
https://www.irishmirror.ie/showbiz/celebrity-news/angela-rippon-flashed-colleague-reading-20638028
EXCLUSIVE: In her peripheral vision, she could see the highly respected BBC newsman "with something white in his hand which was being waggled around"

Get the biggest daily stories by emailSubscribe We will use your email address only for the purpose of sending you newsletters. Please see ourPrivacy Noticefor details of your data protection rightsThank you for subscribingSee our privacy noticeCould not subscribe, try again laterInvalid Email

Angela Rippon was reading the Nine O'Clock News to 10 million BBC viewers when a colleague walked into the studio and unzipped his flies.

She was concentrating on delivering the next item with that famously precise pronunciation of hers.

But, in her peripheral vision, she could see the highly respected BBC newsman "with something white in his hand which was being waggled around".

Without missing a beat, Angela continued the bulletin and, when it cut to a film, she glanced across and saw the colleague poking his shirt tail through his gaping trousers.

"I was obviously meant to think he was exposing himself to me," recalls Angela, rolling her eyes.

"So I said 'For crying out loud, grow up'. I was angry at the disrespect but I didn't even think about reporting it.

"Bearing in mind the era, it would have been 'the woman can't take a joke', and he would have got, at most, a slap on the wrist."

In the 1970s when she became the BBC's first permanent female national newsreader, chiefs were failing to react to serious sexual harassment allegations.

"We knew we wouldn't get any support from management," says Angela, who turned 75 on Saturday.

"So those of us who were aware of the sex pests protected the women in our departments.

"I remember one particular famous person. I won't name him now - though maybe I will one day because it will be quite a shock to people."

She adds: "People would say 'You know, X is a terrible sex pest, but management have said he is a star - deal with it'. So we dealt with it... by not letting our young women go anywhere near him."

Angela hopes things have changed for those who have followed in her wake with the #MeToo movement.

Busier than ever, presenting Rip Off Britain and asking the questions on new quiz show The Wall - she is proof silver-haired women are still TV gold.

She laughs: "When I was 50, John Birt [former BBC Director-General] said to me 'Angela, you have had your day. It's time to make way for the younger women coming behind you'.

"I thought 'Are you saying this to the likes of Michael Parkinson and the other men older than me?'.

"It was such a stupid thing to say. So, I do take a smidgen of pride in being 'a trailblazer' - like Gloria Hunniford and Julia Somerville." (Her Rip Off Britain co-hosts who are 79 and 72 respectively).

Angela adds: "The fact that we are still here gives the women who came after us the confidence that they can be too.

"And, hopefully, they will all get the same salaries as the men. Equal pay for equal work. Because we may have broken through the glass ceiling but we haven't brought the bank with us."

She began as a photo-journalist and TV reporter in her native Devon before joining the BBC's national news in 1974.

A year later she began reading the Nine O'Clock News in the same week Margaret Thatcher became Tory leader.

Angela became one of the best known faces in broadcasting. Roles included hosting coverage of Charles and Diana's wedding in 1981, the first series of Top Gear as well as Antiques Roadshow.

In 1983, Angela and fellow newsreader Anna Ford became part of ITV's Famous Five presenters who launched Britain's second breakfast TV show.

But it floundered and Angela was fired - finding herself out of work for a year.

Then she landed a job with a US television station as an arts and entertainment correspondent.

When she returned to Britain she was snapped up by the BBC as host of Come Dancing. It was perfect because Angela had trained in ballet as a youngster.

It still plays a huge part in her life. Angela was delighted when the Royal Academy of Dance asked her to become Ambassador of Silver Swans - ballet classes for the over-50s.

"It's fantastic," she says. "I love going to classes. We do exercises based on barre and basic work dancers do.

"They strengthen the core, give you balance and flexibility but you also have to use your brain to remember the steps.

"We get to know each other and have a laugh and people go out for coffee after and become great friends."

Angela reveals she even got the Duchess of Cornwall to take up dancing classes.

"Camilla wanted to see our classes as they link in with her work on osteoporosis. So she came to watch a class with her lady-in-waiting.

"She spoke to the ladies and one of them told her 'My balance has imp­­roved so much doing this that now I can put my knickers on standing up!'

"But watching the class she was almost joining in so I said 'You should come and join a class, Ma'am'.

"She said 'Sadly, I don't think that would be possible'. I told her 'Well, we could come to you' - and her face lit up.

"So now Sarah, our teacher, goes to Clarence House and the Duchess has ballet classes with her lady-in-waiting and some other members of staff.

"I saw the Duchess at an osteoporosis event recently and she said she was thrilled to be doing it. I told her I had noticed her posture had changed and she looked much more upright."

So, I ask Angela: "I imagine you're too good a dancer for Strictly?"

"Too good...!" she splutters. "Goodness, no - they've just never asked me. I think it's because I presented Come Dancing.

"I'd have loved to have done it but I'm probably a bit too old now. Yes, I'm still very supple and can do lots, but not all the lifts and things they do now."

Angela doesn't look a day over 50, but she promises me she has never had any work done.

Her expressive eyes sparkle below those arched brows which always made even the dullest headlines seem fascinating.

As we're talking about dancing she suddenly sweeps her arm high above her head with an elegant balletic flourish - and I am transported back 40-odd years to more television gold.

Because I half expect Angela to push back the desk, kick her long legs in the air and burst into a dance routine like she did with Eric and Ern on their 1976 Christmas Special.

She still gets asked about it all the time. "It is lovely when people say 'Ooh, what was it like? I loved Morecambe and Wise'.

"It's a link to two legendary entertainers sadly no longer with us. And, yes, it's another little bit of TV history I can say I was part of."

Angela then shows me that while she can get her left arm up above her head her right one won't go up to meet it.

It's not surprising considering she had major surgery four weeks earlier... a full shoulder replacement. "I injured my shoulder while filming and had the tendons done last October," she says.

"But the pain I had been getting for two years was due to arthritis and my surgeon said there was only one thing to do - replace the lot of it.

"So now I have a bionic shoulder. I can't wait to go through airport security because I've got titanium pins in it and all the bells and whistles will go off."

She adds: "But I'm religiously doing my exercises and I'll be back at dance class this week."

'My men are off-limits'

Angela met engineer Christopher Dare when she was 17, and aged 22 married him in 1967.

They separated in 1989 and since then she has kept that part of her life private.

She says: "I never talk about the men in my life because I respect their privacy.

"I am the one who does a public job not them.

"So, since my divorce I've made it clear to my lovers that they don't have be in the spotlight."
