2019-10-16
https://www.stuff.co.nz/taranaki-daily-news/news/116586913/astronomy-enthusiasts-call-for-worldrenowned-astronomer-beatrice-tinsley-to-be-honoured-in-new-plymouth
She has a mountain, asteroid and science building named after her but world-renowned cosmologist Beatrice Tinsley has no recognition in her home town and astronomy enthusiasts say that needs to change.

Tinsley, who died of cancer aged 40 in 1981, is highly regarded for her research, which added to the acceptance of the Big Bang theory and ever expanding universe.

And while born in Chester, England, in 1941 she moved with her family to New Zealand following the war - first to Christchurch and then to New Plymouth when she was five.

Her father, Edward Hill, was mayor from 1953-56 and she attended New Plymouth Girls' High School (NPGHS), where she excelled at science and graduated at 16 as Dux.

And it is the school that New Plymouth Astronomical Society member Rodney Austin believes is best placed to recognise her achievements by naming something after her.

* Taranaki-raised astronomer's name lives on in new University of Canterbury science building

* New Zealand's ultimate female scientist remembered for breaking glass ceiling

* From New Plymouth to new heights - Beatrice Tinsley's impact on astronomy

"It's strange that there is nothing here in New Plymouth itself," he said.

"I reckon it would be very much a good idea actually because she is an old girl of New Plymouth."

NPGHS did not respond when approached for comment on whether it had plans to commemorate Tinsley.

Tom Whelan, of Cape Egmont Observatory, said he was also disappointed nothing had been done to commemorate Tinsley in New Plymouth.

"Her life's an inspiration.

"She was able to produce this wonderful work and did this all despite she was literally dying of cancer."

Tinsley was most recently recognised at the University of Canterbury, where she completed a Bachelor of Science and a Master of Science with First Class Honours in Physics.

On October 4 the university opened its Rutherford Regional Science and Innovation Centre (RRSIC), in a newly built building they called the Beatrice Tinsley building.

The New Plymouth District Council said Tinsley's life was remembered at Puke Ariki's recent exhibition Hina: Celebrating Taranaki Women but it had no plans to commemorate her permanently.

However, in a written statement, NPDC external relations manager Jacqueline Baker said if a member of the public wanted to honour a Taranaki legend by naming a public building after them council would be happy to listen to their request and see whether it could help.
