2019-10-16
https://financefeeds.com/celebrating-female-leadership-fx-claudia-lucas-institutional-sales-prime/
Electronic trading is a very modern, highly sophisticated and fast-moving business which continues to attract urbane and astute talent across all sectors from experts in specific niches that provide services from cutting-edge digital marketing initiatives, to automated strategies, interactive education packages, ever-evolving retail trading platforms and of course, the brokerages themselves.

Along with the modernity of this industry is the complete lack of a metaphorical 'glass ceiling' - therefore without boundaries, it is very much an environment which encourages free thought, innovation and ultimately career mobility, often very quickly, in the upward direction for those with a driving ambition.

Among today's young executives, the gender equality is also a sign of the modernity of the business, which has its roots, especially in the retail sector, in the early 2000s, and although very highly developed and global, is a fledgling compared to the hierarchical and rigid world of traditional finance.

The ability to move forward very quickly is part of the appeal, and indeed, has given rise to some highly successful leaders - many of whom are ladies, hence FinanceFeeds decided to take a look at what motivates today's successful women in the FX industry and what has led them this far.

How did you get into the electronic trading industry and where did it all start?

My career in the financial services industry started when I moved to London in 2014 after being selected for an internship at Swissquote Bank. Although my higher education was in languages and I speak Spanish and English, I have always had an interest in financial markets and the economy. Over the course of my career I have specialised in the FX & CFDs industry.

Tell us about IS Prime

IS Prime is an FCA regulated Prime of Prime which, in partnership with ISAM - a systematic hedge fund manager, was founded by Raj Sitlani and Jonathan Brewer who worked together in electronic trading for many years, initially at Goldman Sachs and then at Sucden Financial.

The firm has grown rapidly since its inception five years ago and is known across the industry for providing clients with consistently competitive pricing and execution.

I joined IS Prime because it is an industry leader with ambitious growth plans- it's incredibly rewarding working in such a dynamic environment.

What are your views on the women within the financial services industry?

My personal experience as a woman working at IS Prime has been entirely positive but that is not to say that I have not, previously in my career, experienced some of the negative sides of being a woman in this male dominated industry.

I hope that the industry, and society as a whole, can continue to make improvements towards equality in the workplace and I take great inspiration from the women thriving in senior roles at IS Prime such as Katie Christensen who heads up our Compliance Team.

Have you faced any challenges and how did you overcome them?

Studying financial regulations in a second language has been challenging on a personal level for me. However, I have been able to overcome any challenges I have faced through dedication, persistence, positivity and the support of the team around me. These challenges have helped to galvanise my resolve and made me stronger and more confident as a professional.

What are your plans for the future? Where do you see yourself in five years?

My immediate ambitions are to establish a foothold in the LatAm market for IS Prime and to continue to build our reputation as a leading Prime of Prime and multi-asset Liquidity Provider.
