2019-10-18
https://www.greenwichtime.com/local/article/Choral-festival-and-other-things-to-do-in-14545406.php
For the latest events and activities happening in Greenwich, turn to For the record. To have your event included, submit a description, date, time, price and contact information. Photos are welcome. Drop us an email about your latest goings-on at gtcitydesk@scni.com.

Join Audubon Greenwich at 613 Riversville Road for a special celebration of inclusion and take a leisurely walk through the fields and woods to learn about the many colorful birds that live here and watch for migrating hawks, eagles and falcons at the center's Quaker Ridge Hawk Watch. The "Let's Go Birding Together" (LGBT) walk at 9 a.m. Saturday is for anyone who enjoys community, adventure, and wants to get outdoors. Audubon welcome those who identify as LGBTQ, allies, families, and anyone who wants to enjoy an outdoor experience that is fun and inclusive. Cost is $5 for members, $8 for nonmembers. For more information and to RSVP contact Caroline Bailey at Caroline.Bailey@audubon.org.

The Greenwich Botanical Center will host Ghouls in the Garden from 4 to 7 p.m. Saturday at 130 Bible St. The annual Halloween-themed celebration in Greenwich's own spooky forest, the Montgomery Pinetum. The afternoon is filled with fun family activities, including a costume parade, spook walk, pumpkin decorating contest, prizes and tasty refreshments. Rain date is Sunday, Oct. 20. For information and to purchase tickets, visit greenwichbotanicalcenter.org/happening-now/ghouls-in-the-garden/.

The First Congregational Church of Greenwich, 108 Sound Beach Ave., will be hosting the Connecticut Choral Festival on Saturday with a day-long rehearsal, meal, and evening concert at 7:30 p.m. The guest conductor will be Tom Trenney, minister of music at First-Plymouth Church in Lincoln, Neb. This festival is also sponsored by the United Church of Church Musicians Association and the Fairfield-West Chapter of the American Guild of Organists. He will also conduct and play the organ at First Church on Sunday morning, Sunday, as part of the Dedication Service at 10 a.m, following a five-month renovation project in the Meetinghouse (sanctuary). The concert on Saturday evening, as well as Sunday worship, is free and the public is welcome to attend both events.

The Greenwich Farmers Market runs every Saturday from 9:30 a.m. to 1 p.m. into the fall in the Arch Street commuter lot. Enjoy fresh Connecticut-grown produce all season. Over a dozen farm vendors will be in attendance. The parking lot at Arch Street and Horseneck Lane is off Exit 3 of I-95. For more information, visit www.greenwichfarmersmarketct.com/.

The Bruce Museum, 1 Museum Drive, host Family Gallery Tours from 11:30 a.m. to 12:15 p.m. on Sundays. The tours are geared for kids ages 6-10. Free with regular admission, and no registration is required. Visit brucemuseum.org for more info.

Abilis will host its 15th annual Walk/Run for Abilis on Sunday at Greenwich Point Park. This family-friendly event includes children's activities, a Bubble Bus, music, arts & crafts, a 1-mile wheelchair and stroller-accessible walk and a 5k run. This event is one of Abilis' largest fundraiser events and attracts hundreds of participants. Registration is $40 for adult runners; $20 for child runners (ages 11 to 17) and free for children under 11. There is no cost for walkers. To register in advance, donate and or volunteer, visit abilis.us/walkrun. Abilis supports more than 700 individuals with special needs and their families annually from birth throughout adulthood.

Deacon Robert Henrey of St. Catherine of Siena Church will continue his lecture series in which he shares his interest in different religious traditions - as well as in history and linguistics - with photographs taken while visiting countries where those traditions took hold. The next talk will be at 11:30 a.m. Sunday on the topic of "Jordan: The Crossroads of Judaism, Christianity and Islam." Each session is an opportunity to discuss and share ideas on contemporary, religious and social issues. Free, with light refreshments.

A bridal show will be held at the Audubon Greenwich at 613 Riversville Road from noon to 3 p.m. Sunday. The event is perfect for engaged couples and their parents to plan for weddings. Meet bridal professionals and check out their products and services. Raffle prizes will be awarded. Cost is $20 in advance, $25 at the door. Free admission for brides-to-be. To purchase tickets, visit fairfieldcountyweddingconcierge.com/2019-bridal-fete. Also, 10 percent of ticket sales will be donated to the Audubon Greenwich.

The Old Greenwich-Riverside Community Center will hold its annual Model Sailboat Regatta from 1 to 4 p.m. Sunday at Binney Park. Model sailboat enthusiasts of all ages are welcome, with categories for homemade boats, motorized and remote-controlled boats. Hundreds of families are expected to attend. The OGRCC provides arts and crafts activities and music. The regatta raises money for the Scholarship Program, which supports over 70 families in the community each year for everything from soccer to childcare to summer camps. To buy a ticket, visit myogrcc.org. Walk-ins are welcome. For more info, call 203-637-3659.

A Sunday Bird Walk will be held at Greenwich Point Park from 9 to 11:30 a.m. Sunday to view the migrating hawks and raptors. Bring binoculars and meet near the main concession stand at the south end of the beach. The Bird Walks are a series of free, year-round, monthly bird walks providing friendly and informative birding. Guides are knowledgeable local naturalists and birders. Everyone -- from beginner to expert, of all ages -- is welcome. No fees or registration are required. For more information, visit birdwalk.home.blog/. Co-sponsored by Wild Wings and Friends of Greenwich Point.

Weekly open duplicate Bridge games are held at 12:15 p.m. Mondays at the Greenwich YWCA. The games are sanctioned by the American Contract Bridge League, with masterpoint awards to top finishers. The card fee to play one session is $12. For more information, contact Steve Becker at 203-637-8927.

To mark Breast Cancer Awareness Month in October, the Breast Cancer Alliance will host its annual luncheon at 11 a.m. Oct. 21 at the Hyatt Regency Greenwich with celebrity chef and restaurateur Todd English. There will be cocktails, lunch, and silent and live auctions, as well as the Models of Inspiration fashion show with women who are living with or have overcome breast cancer, outfitted in a curated collection from Richards. Since its inception in 1996, BCA has awarded over $27 million in grants to fight the disease. For more info, go to www.BCAgoforpink.org, contact Info@breastcanceralliance.org or call 203-861-0014.

Bruce Beginnings is a program for children ages 2.5 to 5 with an adult at 11 a.m. and 1 p.m. on Tuesdays at the Bruce Museum. Explore the museum collections and exhibitions through picture books and hands-on activities. This program takes place on the museum's free admission day and space is limited. See the visitor service desk upon arrival to secure a spot. Topics change weekly. Visit brucemuseum.org for more info.

Through a partnership with Greenwich Alliance for Education and the generosity of the Greenwich community, members of Boys & Girls Club of Greenwich will participate in a book giveaway from 3 to 5 p.m. Oct. 22. Children are invited to take home as many books as they desire, and can choose from a collection of more than 1,000 books for children up to middle school age. Greenwich Alliance for Education set up book collection bins at Perrot, Greenwich and Cos Cob libraries to solicit donations. A new club at Greenwich High School, the GHS Library Advisory Club, also set up a book collection bin in the GHS Media Center, and will be helping at the book giveaway.

Sarah Deardorff Miller, a senior fellow with Refugees International and a Greenwich resident, will lead a discussion on the global refugee situation and some of the largest displacement crises at a presentation at the Greenwich Historical Society at 7 p.m. Oct. 22. She will consider why refugees are increasingly unwelcome and highlight how our local experience relates to the broader international system in a talk on "The Global Refugee Crisis: Emerging Trends and Challenges." The presentation is part of a series of events the Historical Society is hosting this fall to provide greater perspective on the immigrant and refugee experience, in conjunction with its new exhibition: "An American Story: Finding Home in Fairfield County." Tickets for members are $10, nonmembers $15. For more information and to purchase tickets, visit https://greenwichhistory.org/event/the-global-refugee-crisis-emerging-trends-and-challenges/.

The Round Hill Association will host a candidates debate on Oct. 22 at 7 p.m. at the Round Hill Community House at 397 Round Hill Road. It will be preceded by refreshments at 6:30. League member Jara Burnett will moderate. All four candidates for the Board of Selectmen will take part: first selectman candidates, Republican state Rep. Fred Camillo and Democratic finance board Chair Jill Oberlander, and selectman candidates, Democrat Sandy Litvack, who is seeking a second term in the office, and Republican Lauren Rabin, a member of the Board of Education.

The Greenwich Botanical Center at 130 Bible St. will host a Lunch & Learn on Oct. 23 with Eddie Ross, the East Coast Editor of Better Homes & Gardens. He has worked as a design, decorating and food editor for House Beautiful, Martha Stewart Living and Food Network. Recognized for his inventive, out-of-the-box approach to high-style decorating and entertaining on a budget, Ross has reimagined the aesthetic possibilities in secondhand finds. A trained chef from the Culinary Institute of America, Ross has appeared on "Top Design" and entertaining specials for HGTV. Doors open at 10:30 a.m., with a lecture and presentation followed by Q&A at 10:45 a.m. and a buffet or boxed lunch from 11:45 a.m. to 12:45 p.m. For more information and to register, visit greenwichbotanicalcenter.org/.

Dietitian Denise Addorisio will discuss "A Nutritional Approach to Bone Health" from 6 to 7:30 p.m. Oct. 23 in Greenwich Hospital's Noble Conference Center. Get tips to keep your bones strong and healthy through diet and nutritional supplements. To register, call 888-305-9253 or visit greenwichhospital.org/events. Free.

The Sip & Shop Girls' Night Out Boutique, a fundraiser for Swim Across America Fairfield County, is taking place at the Innis Arden Golf Club from 4 to 9 p.m. Oct. 23. Ad mission is free to the event, which raises funds for crucial cancer research, but no denim please. A percentage of the evening's sales will support Swim Across America Fairfield County and its local beneficiary the Alliance for Cancer Gene Therapy, which funds breakthrough cancer cell and gene therapies. More than 40 vendors are scheduled to participate in the kickoff of the holiday shopping season. Products and services include wine, vodka and food tastings, home décor, men's and women's fashions, jewelry, accessories, beauty products and more. To learn more about this event, visit sipandshopinnisarden2019.eventbrite.com. Swim Across America Fairfield County is in its 13th year of "making waves to fight cancer." To learn more, visit swimacrossamerica.org.

The Old Greenwich Farmers Market is held every Wednesday from 2:30 to 6 p.m. at Living Hope Community Church at 38 West End Ave. in Old Greenwich. The market runs through Oct. 30.

The Perfectly Polite Bridge Group has Duplicate Bridge games at the Greenwich YMCA on Wednesdays from 9:45 a.m. to noon for Relaxed Duplicate Bridge and from 12:45 to 2:45 p.m. for Relaxed Duplicate Bridge / Conventions. The cost is $10 for members and $12 for nonmembers. You do not need a partner to play. Only prepaid players are guaranteed a seat. There is also a Beginner Game/Class with relaxed play and discussion from 3 to 5 p.m. Seating is limited. If you are not on the email list, call Frank Crocker at 203-524-8032 to register.

The Greenwich Retired Men's Association offers a free program at the First Presbyterian Church, 1 W. Putnam Ave., every Wednesday that is open to the public; no reservations required. Social break starts at 10:40 a.m., followed by speaker at 11 a.m. For info, visit www.greenwichrma.org or contact info@greenwichrma.org. Future speakers include Capt. Jesse Paluch, of the New York State Environmental Conservation Police, on "Wildlife Crimes Scene Investigation Training in South Africa: The Front Lines of the Elephants and Rhinoceros Poaching Crisis" on Oct. 23; and Randall Atcheson, minister of music at First Presbyterian Church, on "Piano Music: Patriotic, Gospel, Classical and Jazz" on Oct 30.

The town Conservation Commission is presenting a series of free lectures focusing on the impact of climate change. Residents of all ages are invited. Here is the schedule: At 7 p.m. Oct 23, a lecture at the Greenwich Land Trust, 370 Round Hill Road, will explain how coyotes have modified their behavior to live in suburban environments. At 7 p.m. Oct. 30, Anne Hulick, CT director of Clean Water Action, will discuss the dangers of contaminants at the Greenwich Audubon Center at 613 Riversville Road, with Christopher Perkins, of the Center for Environmental Sciences and Engineering from UConn, presenting the results of a study conducted off Greenwich's shores. At 7 p.m. Nov. 6, Alexander Felson, deputy executive director for The Connecticut Institute of Resilience and Climate Adaptation, will take on the topic of "Climate Change: What to Expect in Greenwich" at the Greenwich Audubon Center. At 7 p.m. Nov. 13, a lecture in the Meeting Room at Town Hall will focus on waste management with speakers from the state Department of Energy and Environmental Protection as well as Julie DesChamps, who was active in the move to ban plastic bags in town. They will discuss how the town is stepping up its waste diversion efforts. At 7 p.m. Nov. 20, a talk on "Trends to Watch for in the Energy Transformation of 2020" will be held at the Boys & Girls Club of Greenwich with a focus on renewable energy, energy use in town and trends in the industry. Bruce Redman Becker, president of EV Club of Connecticut, will discuss the electric car industry. For more information, visit www.greenwichct.gov/295/Environmental-Education.

Tai Chi is a relaxing exercise that can loosen joints, improve balance and teach graceful movements to music. Fun and no pressure classes are held at 8 a.m. Wednesdays and at 9 a.m. Thursdays in the auditorium at the First Congregational Church Auditorium on Sound Beach Avenue in Old Greenwich, opposite Binney Park. The cost is $10 per one-hour session. Newcomers welcome. For info, call Joe at 203-504-4678.

"Relax and Energize with Tai Chi and Guided Sound Meditation" will be presented as part of the Cancer Wellness Series by Roberta Brown, a registered nurse and Integrative Medicine Program coordinator, and Ken Dolan, Tai Chi instructor, from 6 to 7:30 p.m. Oct. 24 in Greenwich Hospital's Noble Conference Center. Maintain balance and peace of mind during challenging times. Practice gentle Tai Chi and conclude with a guided meditation. Dress comfortably; bring a yoga mat if possible; chairs will be provided. To register, call 888-305-9253 or visit greenwichhospital.org/events. Free.

The healthcare system, especially eldercare, is a complex arena. To help seniors and their families navigate the options and learn about available resources, The Greens at Greenwich in partnership with CareBuilders at Home is offering a free seminar and discussion at the YMCA of Greenwich from 5:30 to 7:30 p.m. Oct. 24. The seminar, "Navigating Health Care for Seniors: How Do I Create and Manage My Team of Medical Professionals," is open to the public. It will address a variety of medical options, such as providers and care management services, living options and how to create a team of medical professionals to provide the best quality of life throughout the aging process. It will explore the pros and cons of the various options and give an opportunity to ask questions to a team of experts. The seminar, followed by an open Q&A forum, will be led by Judah Schuster, director of operations at CareBuilders at Home, along with Dr. Stephen Jones, medical director and geriatrician from Yale/New Haven Health Systems; Carole Edelman, geriatric nurse care manager; and Maria Scaros, executive director of The Greens at Greenwich. The seminar is open to the community. Walk-ins are welcome, but reservations are encouraged by calling 203-531-5500 or sending email to mscaros@thegreensatgreenwich.com.

The Byram Shubert Library and the Alpha Chapter of Delta Kappa Gamma will present Greenwich resident Patricia Chadwick discussing her memoir "Little Sister," about growing up in a Catholic cult in the 1950's in Cambridge, Mass. The talk will be held at 4 p.m. Oct. 24 at the Byram Shubert Library, 21 Mead Ave.

Shop, dine and explore the town during Experience Greenwich Week, happening Oct. 24 to Oct. 27. More than 150 merchants in Greenwich, Byram, Cos Cob, Riverside and Old Greenwich will open their doors to offer in-store promotions, experiences and restaurant specials throughout the weekend. Take an Art Walk and stop in any one of the 20-plus fine art galleries townwide or venture off the path for a glimpse of the Experience Greenwich Week art mural project featuring five to nine contemporary art murals. Pick up your Experience Greenwich Week Passport at participating merchants. Visit six different participating merchants, dine at two different participating restaurants and experience two different participating art galleries, then enter to win one of over 25 "Greenwich Experiences" as featured at www.experiencegreenwich.com/.

The Greenwich Commission on Aging will hold its "Ghostly Gala" from 5:30 to 8:30 p.m. Oct. 25 at the Knights of Columbus, 37 W. Putnam Ave. Tickets are $15 per person and going fast. Call to RSVP: 203-862-6721. Costumes are encouraged but optional. Prizes for most creative costume. Dancing to the music of Billy & the Showmen.

Qigong expert Donna Bunte teaches classes at 10 a.m. Fridays at the Greenwich Botanical Center, 130 Bible St., Cos Cob. With roots in Chinese medicine, philosophy and martial arts, qigong is viewed as a practice to cultivate and balance qi (chi), translated as "life energy." Qigong practice involves moving meditation, coordinating slow flowing movement, deep rhythmic breathing, and a calm meditative state of mind. For information, visit greenwichbotanicalcenter.org.

Attendees can skate to spooky tunes, play skating games, take part in the costume contest, enjoy treats and prizes and more at 7 p.m. Oct. 25 at the Old Greenwich Civic Center, 90 Harding Road. The $12 admission per person for the Halloween Roller Skating Party includes rental skates.

The Greenwich Audubon Center will host a variety of activities in celebration of Halloween. On Oct. 25 and Oct. 26, it will host Creepy-Crawly Critters Shows from 6:15 to 7 p.m. and form 7:30 to 8:15 p.m. They slither, and crawl, some have scales, some are hairy -- this creature show is the perfect kind of scary. It will also host a Haunted Forest Walk both days from 7 to 9 p.m. Test your wits on a trail full of Ghouls, Gasps, and Fright. Watch the woods come alive with creatures of the night. Warning: very scary -- proceed with caution. On Oct. 26 only, visit the Enchanted Meadow, with Costumes 'n Characters from 2 to 4 p.m. Don your costume and walk a trail that is fright-free, but filled with characters and animals. Events are rain or shine. For more information or to purchase tickets, visit: greenwich.audubon.org/halloween-weekend. Admission is $13 online (available through Oct. 24) or $15 at the door.

For the first time, Greenwich police and firefighters are teaming with the Boys & Girls Club of Greenwich to hold a Battle of Heroes competition. On Oct. 26 from 11 a.m. to 2 p.m, Greenwich police will partner with BGCG's Torch Club, while Greenwich firefighters will work with BGCG's Keystone Club in an afternoon of kickball, tug of war and obstacle games. Held at Boys & Girls Club of Greenwich at 4 Horseneck Lane, the public is invited to cheer on their favorite team. The event will feature local food trucks, a live band, arts & crafts, face painting, an inflatable course and various emergency vehicles to explore. The event is free and open to the public. Community members are encouraged to support their favorite team by making a donation online at give.classy.org/heroes19 to support travel and registration expenses for the Torch and Keystone Club's annual conferences.

The First Congregational Church of Old Greenwich at 108 Sound Beach Ave. will present a family-friendly Trunk or Treat event from 6 to 8 p.m. Oct. 26. All are welcome. It will include candy, healthy treats, food trucks, cemetery tours, a costume ball, and a trunk decoration contest. This communitywide Trunk or Treat event offers families an opportunity to celebrate the Halloween season by trick or treating in a safe and enclosed environment. Come in costume and join the fun. Entry fee is $10 per family. All net proceeds will be donated to The Barefoot Theater, which provides performance opportunities to under-served children and youth. For more information, call Patrick Collins at 203-637-1791 or visit www.fccog.org. To sign up directly to reserve a space to decorate a trunk, visit: https://secure.accessacs.com/access/eventlogin.aspx?id=4TcwuECSYN6mO7UUXODoYw==&site=1071&ReturnUrl=events%2fwz_people.aspx&ChurchID=6558&EventID=181881&sn=1071

The Cos Cob Archers will hold an Open Shoot from 8 a.m. to 1 p..m. Oct. 27 as they open their club to the public and invite all to attend. Open Shoots are held once a month, generally on the last Sunday of each month; bad weather cancels. The club provides loaner compound bows, arrows and instruction for beginners. The cost -- $20 for shooting adults, $5 for kids under 16, and $10 for non-shooting adults -- includes lunch of grilled hamburgers, hot dogs and soft drinks. The Club's trails cover 23 wooded acres and there are more than 40 shooting stations, with both paper and "3D" targets. Cos Cob Archers is located at 205 Bible St. For more information, visit www.CosCobArchers.com.

The Round Hill Volunteer Fire Company, located at 166 W. Old Mill Road, will hold its annual Open House from noon till 4 p.m. Oct. 27. Come for the bouncy castle, rides on the fire truck and a chance to watch fires being extinguished, or to mingle with friends and meet new neighbors. Food is available. It's a great chance to enjoy lunch in the back country with your family and friends.

Join biologist Jim Carr, who has taught at the New York Botanical Gardens, and Audubon Land Steward Andy Chapin for a workshop to learn how to build a small pond in your backyard. The event will be at 9:30 a.m. Oct. 27 at Audubon Greenwich, 613 Riversville Road. Ponds are tremendously beneficial for your garden, providing critical hydration to your plants and vital habitat for wildlife that support the health of your garden. Recommended for adults and children over 12 who are comfortable with lecture. All levels of awareness and experience welcome. Cost is $8 for general admission or $5 for members, town employees, and professional landscapers. For more information and to RSVP contact Caroline Bailey at Caroline.Bailey@audubon.org.

Join the Bruce Museum for its "Autumn Rains and Fall Colors: Exploring the Bruce Family Day" from 1 to 4 p.m. Oct. 27. There will be a variety of crafts and activities for children, from watercolor painting to learning about minerals. Plus, the Greenwich Conservatory of Classical Ballet will be performing interpretive dances inspired by the contemporary Chinese brushwork exhibition on view in the Bantle Lecture Gallery. Free admission to the event and the museum. No preregistration required.

The Metropolitan String Orchestra will perform music by Boccherini, Vivaldi, Dvorak and more under the direction of Alexis Walls in a concert at 3 p.m. Oct. 27 at St. Catherine of Siena Church, 4 Riverside Ave. The MSO was established to provide young musicians, ages 8 to 18, the opportunity to both learn and perform in musical ensembles. Admission is $20 for adults and free for children 17 and under. Tickets available at the door or reserve at music.director@stcath.org.

The Art Society of Old Greenwich is exhibiting its "2019 ASOG Fall Art Show" at the Greenwich Botanical Center in Cos Cob through Oct. 28. The Greenwich Botanical Center is open 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. weekdays. Free parking on premises. For more information, contact artsocietyoldgreenwich@gmail.com or visit www.asogct.com/fall-show.

Dr. Alyssa Gillego, a breast surgeon, and Carolyn Maguire, an oncology nurse coordinator, will discuss "Breast Cancer: Risk Factors and Treatment" from noon to 1:30 p.m. Oct. 28 in Greenwich Hospital's Noble Conference Center. Hear about risk factors, improvements in 3D mammography, and the newest advances in chemotherapy and surgery. To register, call 888-305-9253 or visit greenwichhospital.org/events. Free.

Dr. Beth Allen Moore, a primary care specialist, will discuss "Women's Health and Preventive Medicine" at Long Ridge Medical Center, 260 Long Ridge Road, Stamford, from noon to 1 p.m. Oct. 28. Learn how preventive medicine impacts your overall health by identifying small problems before they become big ones. To register, call 888-305-9253 or visit greenwichhospital.org/events. Free.

Join Lisa Beebe, director of horticulture of the Greenwich Botanical Center, for a Historical Walk in the Pinetum to see how the landscape of the Pinetum has changed over the past 75 years. The free event is at 2 p.m. Oct. 30 at the GBC at 130 Bible St. Participants will compare photos and history of the majestic "Wild Acres Estate" with the beauty of what has become the Montgomery Pinetum. Wear comfortable shoes and come dressed for the weather. Free for members, $10 for nonmembers. Visit greenwichbotanicalcenter.org/event/a-historical-walk-in-the-pinetum/ for more information.

The League of Women Voters will host a debate between the candidates running for the tax collector's position on Oct. 30 at 7 p.m. at Town Hall. Democratic incumbent Howard Richman, who is seeking his second term, will face off with Republican challenger Heather Smeriglio, who is a former employee of the office.

A "Remember Manero's" Steak Dinner will be held at 6:30 p.m. Nov. 1 at The St. Lawrence Club, 86 Valley Road, Cos Cob. Join the club and reminisce over the beloved and sorely missed Greenwich landmark restaurant. Diners can linger with family and friends over a mouth-watering meal of Steak Tid-bits, garlic bread, fried onions, gorgonzola salad and more. There's no tax or tip, and members of the St. Lawrence Society get a free drink. Cost is $40 for members, $45 for guests and $25 for kids. To RSVP, visit www.stlawrencesociety.com/events or call 203-618-9036.

Parents, are you ready for a post-Halloween party? The Round Hill Firehouse Oktoberfest, to be held Nov. 1 at the Round Hill Community House at 395 Round Hill Road, will offer foot-tapping oompah music from the Alpine Swedes. Bavarian food and beers will be served. Wear your lederhosen or dirndl, pull on your trick or treat outfit, or wear country casual. Bring your friends to enjoy a great night of music and fun. The party starts at 7 p.m. and tickets can be purchased online at roundhill.givesmart.com.

The newly founded Greenwich Theatre Company will present "7 Easy Pieces," a collection of short plays written by award-winning playwright Jack Rushton that explores the theme of relationships and the human need for fulfillment. The performances will be at 8 p.m. Nov. 1 and Nov. 2 and at 2 p.m. Nov. 3 at 100 Arch St. The cast comprises of top Fairfield County talent, including Brian J. Carter, Stephanie Hazard, Melody James, Larry Reina, Kim Squires, Kimberly Wilson and Allan Zeller. Allan Zeller, Andrea Lynn Green, and Stephanie Hazard are the directors, divvying up the collection of plays. Ticket prices range from $10 to $40. Discounts available for students and seniors. Seating is general admission. For information and resevations, call 203-629-5744 or email greenwichtheatrecompany@gmail.com or www.greenwichtheatrecompany.org.

The Greenwich Decorative Arts Society will present "Modernism and Native American Art," a lecture by John Molloy, president of Antique Tribal Art Dealers Association. The event will be from 1:15 to 3 p.m., with refreshments to follow, on Nov. 4 at the Bruce Museum. The lecture will allow exploration of two areas of Native American art: Navajo textiles and plains and plateau parfleche (painted rawhide containers). Both of these traditions will be discuss independently and how they pre-figure modern art and American abstraction. Admission for nonmembers is $25. Space is limited. Reservations required for members and guests by Oct. 28. For reservations and information: email greenwichdecorativearts@gmail.com or visit www.greenwichdecorativearts.org.

The Bruce Museum and Greenwich Arts Council are partnering to present a concert by renowned cellist Kenneth Kuo on Nov. 6. He will be performing works inspired by the pieces exhibited in "Contemporary Artists/Traditional Forms: Chinese Brushwork." This special evening will begin at the Bruce with an after-hours viewing of the exhibition and light refreshments beginning at 5 p.m. The evening continues at 6:30 p.m. at the Greenwich Arts Council, 299 Greenwich Ave., as Kuo performs accompanied by pianist Matthieu Cognet. This program is free.

The Greenwich Historical Society is holding its annual Holiday Boutique from 6 to 8:30 p.m. Nov.6 and 9 a.m. t 6 p.m. Nov. 7 at Christ Church at 254 E Putnam Ave. in Greenwich. The boutique will offer a curated collection of 35 vendors whose offerings range from monogrammed children's wear to cozy knitwear, fine jewelry and specialty foods. Find something special for everyone on your list, with a portion of proceeds going to support art and education programs at the Historical Society.

"The Bruce Museum Presents," a series of monthly public programs featuring thought leaders in the fields of art and science, showcases experts on subjects of relevance and interest to the community. The series continues with "Rewind/Fast-Forward: Celebrating the Artist Documentaries of Olympia Stone" from 6 to 8:30 p.m. Nov. 7. An independent producer of documentary films, Stone's first documentary, "The Collector," explored the five-decade career of her father, famed NYC gallery owner and art collector Allan Stone. For the event, join Stone and two of her artist subjects -- James Grashow ("The Cardboard Bernini") and Elizabeth King ("Double Take: The Art of Elizabeth King") -- for a retrospective of these films. Moderated by Leonard Jacobs. Doors open at 6 p.m. for a reception with light bites and beverages, followed by the panel discussion and Q&A from 7 to 8:30 p.m. Seats are $30 for museum members, $45 for nonmembers. To reserve a seat, visit brucemuseum.org or call 203-869-0376.

The Woman's Club of Greenwich will holds its Holiday Boutique from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Nov. 8 and 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. Nov. 9 at 89 Maple Ave. Free admission. Two floors of vendors, visits from Santa, raffle prizes and Grandma's Kitchen. Proceeds benefit the philanthropies of the Woman's Club of Greenwich, a nonprofit organization establishedin 1910.

The Bacon Brothers, a band started by the award-winning actor Kevin Bacon and his brother Michael, an Emmy-winning composer, will perform an intimate concert on Nov. 9 at a fundraiser for Fairfield County's Inner-City Foundation for Charity & Education. The event, the 28th annual fall gala to benefit The Inner-City Foundation, will be held at the Hyatt Regency in Old Greenwich. It is the largest fundraiser of the year for foundation, which supports organizations that provide education, food, shelter, help for addiction, domestic violence and much more to the neediest in Fairfield County. For more information and tickets, tables or sponsorships, visit innercityfoundation.org or call 203-416-1363.

The Connecticut Ceramics Study Circle will present a lecture on "Enlightenment in the Staffordshire Potteries" from 1:15 to 3 p.m. Nov. 11 at the Bruce Museum. The lecture will be by Nicholas Dawes, senior vice president of special collections at the Heritage Auctions in New York City. Refreshments will follow. The Age of Enlightenment is commonly centered on luminary cities of northern Europe, but the cluster of small towns around Stoke-on-Trent in the English Midlands held their own in this important era. Dawes traces the movement's evolution from the mid-Georgian years into the dawn of the Victorian era. He has made regular appearances as an appraiser for "Antiques Roadshow" on PBS. Admission for non-members is $25. For reservations and information, visit www.ctcsc.org.

This program at the Bruce Museum provides a welcoming and engaging museum experience for toddlers, ages 10 to 24 months, and their caregivers through hands-on play and exploration. Bruce Beginnings Jr. sessions are inspired by the museum's collections and exhibits. It is held from 9:45 to 10:45 a.m. on the second Thursday of each month, next time on Nov. 14. This program is free with general admission but space is limited. See the visitor service desk upon arrival to secure a spot.

Greenwich Historical Society's Story Barn is a highly anticipated biannual event that explores various themes through sharing personal stories from the sublime to the ridiculous. This fall's theme is based on immigration and relocation to tie to the focus of the Historical Society's new exhibition: "An American Story: Finding Home in Fairfield County." The show will be at 7 p.m. Nov. 15 in a cabaret-style setting. It is expertly emceed by Bonnie Levison. Wine, beer and tasty snacks will be served. Cost is $15 for members, $20 for nonmembers. The Historical Society is at 47 Strickland Road.

The Chamber Players of the Greenwich Symphony will next perform in a pair of concerts titled "Out of the Salon." The concerts will take place at 4 p.m. Nov. 17 at Round Hill Community Church, 395 Round Hill Road, and at 7:30 p.m. Nov. 18 at the Greenwich Arts Council, 299 Greenwich Ave. The program will include lyrical works for trios in a small setting, featuring flute, piano and strings. Works include Pierné's Sonata da Camera and Clara Schumann's Piano Trio. Attendees can meet with the musicians afterward at a wine and cheese reception. Ticket prices are $30 for adults and $5 for students. For more information, contact 203-637-4725 or chamberplayers@outlook.com, or visit chamberplayersofthegso.org.

The Greenwich Symphony Orchestra will be in concert on Nov. 23 and Nov. 24, featuring Mozart, Symphony No. 35 (Haffner); Brahms, Schicksalslied (Song of Destiny) with the Greenwich High School Select Choirs; and Schubert, Symphony No. 10, which is the U.S. premiere of performance version by Pierre Bartholomee. The concerts on Jan. 11 and Jan. 12 featuring Verdi, Overture to La Battaglia di Legnano; Schumann, Piano Concerto with Benjamin Hochman on piano; and Korngold, Symphony, Op. 40, with Benjamin Hochman on piano. The concerts on Feb. 22 and Feb. 23 will feature Beethoven, Symphony No. 3 (Eroica); and Beethoven, Piano Concerto No. 5 (Emperor), with John O'Conor on piano. The concerts on April 18 and April 19 will feature Hindemith, Concert Music for Strings and Brass; Herbert, Concerto No. 2 for Cello, with Daniel Miller on cello; and Berlioz, Symphonie Fantastique. Concerts are at the Greenwich High School Performing Arts Center, 10 Hillside Road, at 8 p.m. on Saturdays and 4 p.m. on Sundays. Tickets are $40 per person, $10 students. For more information, call 203-869-2664 or visit www.greenwichsymphony.org.

Stop by the Holiday Sip & Shop Art Show at Abilis Gardens & Gifts from 5 to 8 p.m. Dec. 4. Enjoy wine, cheese and other refreshments while shopping with a 20 percent discount in the entire store. The Art Show will feature paintings and digital art created by adults who are supported by Abilis. To learn more, visit abilis.us/calendar. Abilis is a nonprofit organization that supports more than 700 individuals with special needs and their families annually from birth throughout adulthood in the area.

"The Bruce Museum Presents" is a series of monthly public programs featuring thought leaders in the fields of art and science. It will showcase experts on subjects of relevance and interest to the community. The program continues with "Can Art Drive Change on Climate Change? An Evening with Alexis Rockman" from 6 to 8:30 p.m. Dec. 5. Among current American artists motivated by nature and its future -- from the specter of climate change to the implications of genetic engineering -- Rockman holds a high place of honor. Join the Bruce for a night of discussion and debate featuring Rockman and a panel of thought leaders in contemporary art and science. Doors open at 6 p.m. for a reception with light bites and beverages, followed by the panel discussion and Q&A from 7 to 8:30 p.m. Seats are $30 for Museum members, $45 for nonmembers. To reserve a seat, visit brucemuseum.org or call 203-869-0376.

The Bruce Museum is offering free admission to all visitors through Jan. 31 while the main gallery spaces are renovated. "Contemporary Artists/Traditional Forms: Chinese Brushwork" is on display in the Bantle Lecture Gallery through Dec. 8. It features the U.S. debut of 15 pieces of contemporary Chinese Brushwork gifted to the Town of Greenwich as part of the 2019 U.S.-China Art and Culture Exchange. During the renovation phase, the Permanent Science Gallery will remain open, along with the Bantle Lecture Gallery, Education Workshop, and Museum Store. The galleries will reopen Feb. 1, with the installation of major new art and science exhibitions. Visit BruceMuseum.org for more information.

The Greenwich Historical Society at 47 Strickland Road, Cos Cob, is presenting an exhibition on the immigrant experience called "An American Story: Finding Home in Fairfield County" through Jan. 6. The exhibit includes stories of the grit and resilience of immigrants and refugees, including 12 who found home in Greenwich. The stories illuminated in this timely exhibition reach across the world from five continents, shining a light on the ways that refugees and asylum seekers find hope and persevere in the face of daunting challenges for creating new lives in Fairfield County. The exhibition is presented in partnership with the Connecticut Institute for Refugees and Immigrants. For more information, visit greenwichhistory.org.

The St. Lawrence Society will hold its 29th annual Charity Golf Tournament on May 11. Enjoy a perfect day of golf, food and fun. Get your foursomes together and join the fun. Cost is $175 for everything: the luncheon, cart, golf, cocktail hour and dinner. For cocktails and dinner only, it's $100. Starts at 11:30 a.m. at E. Gaynor Brennan Golf Course, with a 12:45 p.m. shotgun start, scramble format. Golf is followed by cocktail hour, antipasti and a prime rib dinner back at the Club. To RSVP, visit www.stlawrencesociety.com/events or call 203-618-9036.
