2019-10-18
https://jobs.theguardian.com/job/6985327/communications-manager/
Are you an experienced Communications Manager with a hands on approach?

Do you want to work in a tight-knit and rewarding environment?

Prospectus is delighted to be working with an international welfare charity supporting men and women who work at sea. The organisation supports seafarers with any number of problems ranging from money concerns, to mental health and loneliness. Line managing the Digital Communications Officer, the overall purpose of this role is to formulate the marketing and communications strategy supporting the overall growth and development of the organisation. You will ensure the marketing needs of the organisation are met at the highest of standard, whilst promoting the mission of the charity and the services they provide.

Reporting to the Director of Development, the post-holder will develop and implement the marketing and communications strategy both internally and externally to reach identified key stakeholder audiences, developing key relationships with relevant news and media outlets as well as supplying briefs, photo calls and interviews including features and contributions. You will be responsible for the website such as editing content and sourcing stories alongside maintaining brand and key messaging with the brand guidelines. You will play a pivotal role supporting the Digital Communications Officer who is responsible for managing social media. With overall responsibility of publications and marketing materials, the successful candidate will liaise with external agencies, write marketing materials as well as sourcing relevant material for liaising with an external agency on the production of supporter and corporate newsletters and e-newsletters.

To be considered for this role it is essential to have proven experience within a communications and marketing role with experience of setting up and maintaining websites, blogs and social media. The placed candidate will have exceptional written and verbal communications skills and have experience of Adobe Creative Cloud, Photoshop and InDesign . Line management skills are required for this role and you must be able to produce analytical reports. An interest in maritime is desirable and ideally you will work well both independently and as part of a team.

A full job description will be provided to candidates shortlisted by Prospectus.

Please apply with a Word Document copy of your CV. Cover letters are not required at this stage.
