2019-10-16
https://www.bnionline.net/en/news/first-woman-appointed-leadership-role-eaos-peace-process-working-team
A representative of the Pa-O National Liberation Organization was appointed by representatives of ethnic armed organizations (EAOs) signatory to Burma's Nationwide Ceasefire Agreement (NCA) as the new deputy head of their Peace Process Working Team.

Nang Yin Yin Soe is the first women to hold the leadership role in the group, which has been operational since September 2018 within the Peace Process Steering Team (PPST).

She was appointed as deputy head of the eight-member working group.

"I will try to work with other EAOs, CSOs (civil society organizations), and related organizations for women's participation in the peace process," Nang Yin Yin Soe told NMG. "I will try to promote women's participation in decision-making bodies. We have to try."

Women's rights activists and human rights organizations have called on stakeholders to prioritize meaningful participation from women in peace efforts in Burma. EAOs have agreed in principle to a gender quota of 30 percent women in the peace process, but the aim has yet to be reached.

Chairperson of the Rakhine Women's Union and representative of the Arakan Liberation Party in the PPST Saw Mra Razarlin said she "welcomed" Nang Yin Yin Soe's appointment.

"I expect that women will be appointed in leading position in the future without gender discrimination," she told NMG.

Nang Yin Yin Soe's appointment took place during the fifth PPST meeting, held in Chiang Mai, Thailand from October 10-12. A total of 74 representatives attended, including representatives from the 10 NCA-signatory EAOs, PPST leaders, advisors, technical support team members and office staff.

NCA-signatory EAOs include the Arakan Liberation Party, All-Burma Students Democratic Front, Chin National Front, Democratic Karen Buddhist Army, Karen National Liberation Army/Peace Council, Karen National Union, Lahu Democratic Union, New Mon State Party, Pa-O National Liberation Organization and the Restoration Council of Shan State.
