2019-10-17
https://www.tennessean.com/story/life/arts/2019/10/17/four-art-shows-to-see-right-now-in-nashville/3985491002/
Melinda Baker Special to Nashville Tennessean / USA TODAY NETWORK -- TENNESSEE

Mark your calendars. From surreal fruit to powerful portraiture and Eric Carle, here are four fall art exhibitions you'll not want to miss.

A major benefit of keeping up with the contemporary art world is that you get to watch artists develop their practice in real time. Nashville-based artist David Onri Anderson has quickly established himself as one to follow, and as his latest solo exhibition at David Lusk Gallery (DLG) shows, he continues to level up.

"Fragile as Fruit" presents a new series of paintings that explore the fragility of life via bold, cartoonish representations of fruit, specifically apples, bananas and eggs -- yes, eggs can be considered a fruit. Anderson's influences include tantric art and cosmic philosophy, and his depictions read like personifications of the human condition and form -- bananas dance, chewed apple cores mirror the female anatomy, and cracked-open eggs reveal surreal inner worlds. Exuding aliveness and charm, the works celebrate the still-life tradition while making it new, invoking ideas of our interconnectivity with the natural world and the universal cycles of growth, sensuality and decay.

At 11 a.m. Saturday, Oct. 26, DLG will host another installment of "DiaLoGue," an open forum discussion led by Anderson and Vanderbilt Fine Arts Gallery interim curator, Emily Weiner. The event is free and open to the public.

David Lusk Gallery is at 516 Hagan St. Its hours are 10-5:30 p.m. Tuesday-Friday; 11 a.m.-4 p.m. Saturday. Admission is free.

GET THE LATEST UPDATES: Download the free Tennessean app on your mobile device

COOP Gallery's "TAKE REFUGE" is a group exhibition of textile works by artists Belzar Aradini, Nuveen Bawari, Aram Han Sifuentes and Tshab Her, all of whom share immigrant and refugee backgrounds. Like so many exhibitions that have emerged in recent years to address the policies and escalating tensions in the U.S. around immigration and citizenship, this one gives voice and visibility to those who have been personally affected.

Featuring a range of works, from Aradini's delicate embroidered wall sculptures of Kurdish families to Sifuentes' towering protest banner, the exhibition meditates on themes of belonging, "we"-ing or unity, and the ability of women's work to empower and offer comfort in the face of instability.

COOP Gallery is at 507 Hagan St. Its hours are 11 a.m.-3 p.m. Saturdays and by appointment. Admission is free.

In the age of selfies and obsessive life-documentation, portrait art has adapted and evolved, remaining ever relevant and powerful. "Fragile Figures: Beings and Time," on view at 21c Museum Hotel Nashville, celebrates the range and complexity of contemporary portraiture with a showcase of paintings, drawings, photographs and more by 54 artists, including Alfred Conteh, Zanele Muholi, Simone Leigh, Anthony Goicolea and Hassan Hajjaj.

Frank and emotionally raw, the exhibition explores the intersections of individual and group identity with a focus on how our shifting notions of self and other play into social, cultural and political unrest.

21c Museum Hotel Nashville is at 221 Second Ave. N. It is open 24 hours, 7 days a week. Admission is free.

Visitors of all ages will enjoy "Eric Carle's Picture Books: Celebrating 50 Years of The Very Hungry Caterpillar" now on view at the Frist Art Museum. Organized by the Eric Carle Museum of Picture Book Art, the exhibition celebrates the innovative storytelling and collage illustrations of the beloved children's book author-illustrator. On display are over 100 original artworks from more than 21 of his renowned books, from his 1967 classic "Brown Bear, Brown Bear, What Do You See?" to his 2015 homage to surrealism, "The Nonsense Show" -- as well as rare videos and biographical information. Visitors will also enjoy a special section dedicated to his best known book, "The Very Hungry Caterpillar," and book nooks throughout the exhibition where English, Braille and foreign-language copies of Carle's books are available to read.

The Frist is at 919 Broadway. It's hours are 10 a.m.-5:30 p.m. Monday-Wednesday; 10 a.m.-9 p.m. Thursday and Friday; 10 a.m.-5:30 p.m. Saturday; 1-5:30 p.m. Sunday. Admission is $15; $10 for seniors; $10 for college students with ID; $8 for military with ID; free for members and visitors 18 and younger.

More arts news: Frist Art Museum presents sweeping exhibition of art by Native American women
