2019-10-17
https://www.fortsaskatchewanrecord.com/news/local-news/international-day-of-the-girl-celebrated-in-the-fort
Mayor Gale Katchur issued a proclamation in line with the United Nations declaring Oct. 11 as the International Day of the Girl.

The theme this year issued by the United Nations was girl force: unscripted and unstoppable. The Boys and Girls Club of Fort Saskatchewan in partnership with the Rotary Club and with the help of the Royal Purple could not agree more. Working together the group has been raising money to help send a girl to school in Nepal.

"We are fortunate to be able to work with the Rotary Club of Fort Saskatchewan and Royal Purple and to celebrate and have youth come out," said event organizer Heather Holowaychuk with the Boys and Girls Club.

Last year the initiative was able to raise enough money to send girls to school in India. An initiative that Holowaychuk said she is proud of, but she hopes what they do translates locally as well.

"Today is about that international focus of girl's rights, but it's also about the quality among us, you know, locally, and so we have a lot of men here, people from the LGBTQ+ community, Royal Purple and the Mayor," she said.

The event had some of the youth from the Boys and Girls club performing, time to mingle with one another and partake in crafts.

Mayor Gale Katchur was on hand to discuss what the International Day of the Girl means to her. She said that living in Canada we are accustomed to the rights and freedoms that we have but there are so many girls in countries that could be sold as brides or into sex trafficking when they are only 12 or 14 years old. She was also concerned that many girls across the world will not have the opportunity to attend school.

"We have to keep this conversation going and we have to be out there supporting the rights of girls, helping mothers and women empower these girls to know that there is more to life," said Katchur.

The mayor also talked a little bit about Hazel McCallion, a retired mayor from Mississauga Ontario, who until recently held the title of the person to hold office in a notable municipality for the longest in the country.

"She says that women have to work twice as hard as men. They have to think like a man, work like a dog and be there to get the job done. Her message is that women have to support women," said Katchur about how McCallion inspires her.

The United Nations stated that the day is about the global movement on issues ranging from sexual and reproductive health rights to equal pay. It also stated that more girls today are attending and completing school, fewer are getting married or becoming mothers while still children, and more are gaining the skills they need to grow into the working future.

"I'm so grateful to live in Canada, to the freedoms I have and to raise my own daughter to be a strong powerful woman," said Katchur.

Twitter.com / @dferryonline

dferry@postmedia.com
