2019-10-18
https://www.theloop.ca/jameela-jamil-and-cara-delevingne-have-made-up-after-public-feud/
Jameela Jamil and Cara Delevingne are giving a masterclass in how to have different opinions and still act like adults. The two women were previously engaged in a very public feud earlier this year but managed to find a common ground while attending the same event on October 13.

Following the death of fashion designer Karl Lagerfeld in February, Jamil spoke out against the Chanel designer, tweeting that he was a "ruthless, fat-phobic misogynist." The comments didn't sit well with Delevingne, with the model enjoying a long working relationship and friendship with Lagerfeld. This led to an extensive and heated debate between Jamil and Delevingne, with the pair arguing about Lagerfeld's negative impact on the fashion industry and whether it is appropriate to bring up someone's terrible behaviour so soon after they've died.

Delevingne and Jamil came face to face earlier this week when they both attended the second annual Girl Up Girl Hero Awards, where they were honoured along with Kate Hudson for using their platforms to improve the lives of girls and women around the world, while also championing LGBTQ rights and body positivity. Both women gave speeches at the event, calling on Hollywood to increase the presence of women and LGBTQ people both on screen and behind the scenes, while also encouraging women to be their own cheerleaders. Rather than just paying lip service to their messages of female solidarity, the two women also used the event as a chance to continue the dialogue they began in February.

Tweeting a picture of Delevingne giving Jamil a kiss, The Good Place star wrote "We had a very public disagreement, and sorted out our differences rationally, and empathetically, as humans in person. I like it when women work together. We are invariably stronger this way."

The response on Jamil's Twitter to the picture of the women working out their differences has been overwhelmingly positive, with Jamil continuing to use the interaction as a teachable moment. Sometimes social media is great.
