2019-10-16
https://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-7578803/Lizzie-Cundy-returns-work-split-Jeremy-Gordeno.html
By Kate Thomas for MailOnline and Paul Thompson for MailOnline

Lizzie Cundy was left heartbroken after splitting from her boyfriend Jeremy Gordeno, 53, amid claims he developed a close friendship with his former fiancée's 21-year-old daughter.

But the 49-year-old media personality has brushed off the drama and put on a brave face to take part in a debate on Good Morning Britain about Victoria's Secret models.

Showing Jeremy what he's missing as she busied herself in her work. Lizzie engaged in a heated debate with Baroness Michelle Mone, 48.

Bouncing back: Lizzie Cundy put on a brave face following her break-up with nightclub boss Jeremy Gordeno, taking part in a debate on Good Morning Britain about Victoria's Secret models on Wednesday morning

The former WAG showed no sign of upset during her television appearance, looking glamorous as ever in a white lace dress as she took her mind off the break-up.

An insider told MailOnline: 'Lizzie has vowed to get her strength back and is sick of wasting her energy on Jeremy.'

Speaking on GMB, Lizzie slammed Victoria's Secret's decision to hire size 16 model Ali Tate Cutler, insisting it was solely down to 'pressure' from the 'PC police'.

Lizzie and Michelle were joined by Ali herself to discuss the lingerie giant's decision to work with a plus-sized model for the first time in the brand's history.

In happier times: LIzzie and nightclub boss Gordeno, who were last pictured together at last month's National Reality TV Awards, split after 10 months together

Opinionated: Speaking on GMB, Lizzie slammed Victoria's Secret's decision to hire size 16 model Ali Tate Cutler, insisting it was solely down to 'pressure' from the 'PC police'

Opposing views: Showing Jeremy what he's missing as she busied herself in her work. Lizzie engaged in a heated debate with Baroness Michelle Mone (left)

Ali felt that every woman should be able to feel 'sexy' regardless of their size, while Lizzie said it was a 'shame' the brand was becoming more inclusive as the 'Amazonian women' they usually hire 'work so hard for their bodies'.

Lizzie said: 'I think there's pressure, I think its a shame.

'Victoria secret is a winning brand, these women are like athletes and it's such a shame I feel like your're under pressure, the PC world gone mad.

Speaking out: Ali appeared on GMB via video link where she insisted that every woman should be able to feel 'sexy' regardless of their size

'I just think its a shame because it's known for the supermodels and the amazonian women who work so hard for their bodies.'

It was revealed over the weekend that Jeremy had been spending an increasing amount of time with mother-of-one Francesca Hodge, who is 32 years his junior and the daughter of his former fiancée.

Pictures have emerged of Francesca sitting on the millionaire nightclub boss's lap in a bar, which have angered Francesca's mother, Candice Hodge.

Upset: Lizzie's on-off lover Jeremy Gordeno (right), 53, has struck up a close friendship with Francesca Hodge (left), the 21-year-old daughter of his former girlfriend, Candice Hodge

Gordeno was seeing Candice, 39, for two years before he began a relationship with former WAG Ms Cundy earlier this year.

Businessman Gordeno reflected on the end of his 10-month relationship in a statement after he was dumped by Ms Cundy, saying that said events outside of his control put the relationship under huge strain.

But today Candice told MailOnline that the real reason the relationship ended was because she has struck up a closeness with Francesca.

Photo: A photo has SINCE emerged of blonde mother of one Francesca sitting on the nightclub entrepreneur's lap, which has angered her mother

Awkward: Candice Hodge (right) previously dated Gordeno (centre) for two years and the couple were said to have been engaged. Candice is said to be upset at Gordeno's friendship with her daughter Francesca (left), pictured with the couple on holiday two years ago

Speaking to MailOnline, Candice said she felt 'deeply upset', admitting: 'I have fallen out with Francesca over this and are now no longer on speaking terms. She knows how how I feel about this man and I feel it is a betrayal.

'Francesca knows how he treated me and our history together. He had proposed and we were going to get married, then it was all off. I don't know if I can ever forgive her.'

Candice, who runs a upmarket dog grooming business in Weybridge, Surrey, said she was stunned when she first discovered she had been dumped for Ms Cundy and is shocked to learn that her daughter is spending time with her former partner.

Growing close: Francesca (pictured) is said to have been spending increasing amounts of time with Gordeno in recent weeks

She went on: 'He is more than twice her age and I don't feel it's appropriate.

'She has denied anything is going on, but they have been spotted in the pub together and she was seen getting out of his car.

Mother of one Francesca has moved out of the home she shared with her mother in Cobham, Surrey, and went to stay with an aunt a few miles away in Guildford.

Her grandfather Robert told MailOnline: 'I've heard about this friendship and no one in the family is particularly happy about it and it's caused a bit of a rift.'

Family rift: Candice, pictured on holiday with Francesca, right, told MailOnline that she is angry with her daughter for becoming close to Gordeno after she was with him for two years

Earlier Entrepreneur Gordeno praised Ms Cundy in his statement, calling her 'fun and beautiful Lizzie'.

'I will always be very fond of Lizzie,' he said. 'But events outside our control put our relationship under huge strain. I have come to realise it's best we stay just friends.

'The last few months have been like a soap opera. Lizzie and I have been the innocent victim of some wild and false accusations. Life with Lizzie is tremendous fun...

'We got on really well from the word go. We didn't stop laughing for weeks. Our friend told Lizzie before we met, "Jeremy will cheer you up" and I hope I did. She's not only beautiful but great company.

Speaking out: Gordeno, pictured leaving a property in Guildford, Surrey, who at 53 is 32 years older than Francesca, paid tribute to 'fun Lizzie' after their split

'Lizzie's a super girl who is loads of fun. I wish her all the best for the future and hope we can stay good pals.'

Meanwhile TV personality Lizzie who was previously married to footballer Jason Cundy, insisted she had dumped him when she told MailOnline: 'I ended it. I want nothing more to do with him. I'm shocked and horrified by recent events'.

The former couple had been introduced through a mutual friend in a Weybridge wine bar and had been seen together at a number of society events as their romance blossomed.

But their relationship ran into trouble in May when Lizzie was confronted by Candice as she posed for a glam photoshoot at Gordeno's home.

Moving on: Lizzie (right) insisted she'd called time on the fling with millionaire Gordeno and said she wants nothing more to do with him. It is unclear if she knows of his friendship with Francesca (left)

The former WAG was called a 'f***ing whore' as she was being pictured with her then-lover by the pool at his mansion.

She was yelled at by Gordeno's former finacée Candice, who had stormed on to the set after letting herself into the house.

Speaking to The Sun, Candice revealed she branded Cundy a 'f**king whore' in the showdown, as she explained: 'All the cameras were around her. I don't normally swear but I couldn't help myself. I shouted, "You f***ing whore!".'

Clearly heartbroken, Candice claimed Gordeno had revealed he wanted to start a family with her.

Gordeno said: 'I will always be very fond of Lizzie. But events outside our control put our relationship under huge strain and it's best we stay friends'

They have been a couple since 2016 but friends of the tycoon say he broke off the relationship before romancing Cundy.

After the nightclub owner proposed in Italy, she revealed she had made the shocking discovery of his romance with Lizzie.

She said: 'I felt everything crumble around me. I couldn't believe what I was seeing and I couldn't believe he was telling me to leave and not her. We have been through so much together.

'I was crying. I said to him, 'Three years and you treat me like this for her?' As I was leaving I said, 'He asked me to marry me, we have been looking for rings, why have you done this?'.'

Francesca and Gordeno have not responded to requests for a comment.

Not meant to be: Lizzie, who was previous married to footballer Jason Cundy, and her lover were introduced by mutual friends at a wine bar in Weybridge where romance blossomed between the pair
