2019-10-17
https://www.bmmagazine.co.uk/business/manifestations-of-gender-inequality-in-higher-education-workplace/
Many authors write essays about our good old gender gap in (higher) education.

Even more about gender discrimination in the workplace. This says a lot about the position women currently occupy in society.

There is much to learn from an argumentative essay about feminism. They explain why there is still a lot of work to do. Not a bad idea to check these brilliant feminism essays. It's important to read samples of these essays if you want opinions that were built on facts. These writers may counter opposite claims and briefcase their waterproof research results.

More action is necessary to finally close the gap between the genders. Describing a proper gender inequality definition reveals this reality. What are several manifestations of this seemingly endless battle?

Men and women aren't equal. That's true in a sense there is a difference in their biology, their way of approaching problems, etcetera. Cultural habits emphasize this natural distinction. Social conventions have a profound impact on education and career. Unequal treatment is often a result of designated gender roles.

Identifying the problem is good, but knowing what can be done more is better. Realizing there is still a problem, should be followed up by appropriate action.

Examples of manifestations of gender inequality in education and workplace. Kept alive by prejudices

Ø Compared to a year ago, there are now slightly more female senior management team members. This should get us in a mood to uncork a bottle of bubbles? Think again. But women take time off to give birth and are caregivers, aren't they? Why then should women get equal pay and responsibilities in a business? Women are tired when they come to work!

Ø Many people hang onto old fashioned perceptions of the role of women in households. This connects seamlessly with equality in professional life. This connection is often underestimated. Women can hardly refuse to have children, so they're able to compete with men. Right?

Ø Painful: Many working moms don't realize they are discriminated at work. But the statistics prove it.

Ø Women's voices are not enough heard at work. Women often don't feel comfortable when expressing themselves. They seem to lack belief in their own abilities.

Ø Promotions and career opportunities often are reserved for men, so women keep earning less. As much as £223,000 in their total career. This comes as no surprise knowing that women only get 80% of what their male colleagues make.

Ø Women who hold top positions are kept out of the spotlight.

Ø Even when the numbers go up thanks to the expertise brought it by women, the mentality of many companies doesn't evolve quick enough.

Ø Some firms want their board members to be made up of one-third women by next year. 33%? We have a long way to go seems.

Already before women enter the job market, they encounter problems. Seeds planted in the educational soil, grow into weeds that are tough to kill. Here are some of them.

Ø UK based universities receive and accept more applications from women. High school girls outperform boys in math and sciences. Still, this isn't rewarded on the work floor.

Ø Awareness of inequality in higher education isn't much to boast about. The fact is right in front of us, but many think there are no problems with gender any longer. We are already equal, they presume.

Ø Female role models for male and female students are scarce.

Both women and men must try harder. We wish to erase the gender inequality definition in our vocabulary. That's a bold statement to finish with. Even so, it's a true call to motivate everybody and do more than just writing about feminism topics in essays.

And the most important change is to decrease stereotyping. As long as women handle most of the caretaking, scrubbing and diaper changing... the opinion women can't expect the same career growth won't alter. Nor will the related financial compensation.
