2019-10-18
https://www.forbes.com/sites/civicnation/2019/10/18/my-journey-as-a-first-generation-american-in-post-secondary-education/
Like many first-generation Americans, the obstacles that I was bound to face preceded me. My journey began through my experiences with failure in high school. I failed my senior year and was on the verge of dropping out, because I lacked motivation and was unclear about what was destined for me after high school. I returned the following school year and passed the classes I needed to walk at graduation. My cumulative GPA was a meager 1.6, and I did what most kids with my grades were doing, I enrolled at my local community college.

I felt intimidated by college -- I was the first in my family to step foot on a college campus, and I didn't know basic jargon like the difference between an AA and an AAS degree or what office hours were or what a TA was. I also worked full-time with inconsistencies in my work schedule that would hinder my progress in college, subsequently causing me to fail every class that semester. Like many students, I thought, "College just isn't for me." I would not return the following semester and dedicated all my time to being in the workforce.

A few months after dropping out of Northern Virginia Community College (NOVA), I found out that my girlfriend and I were pregnant, and I knew I was going to have to provide for my family. I now felt stuck in the workforce because there was no feasible option to financially empower myself. I would end up working at the same job for five years and had hit the glass-ceiling long ago. There was no opportunity for upward mobility, and with my high school diploma alone, I would not meet the criteria for many jobs with the salary I needed to lift up my family. After five long years of working, with the support of people that saw my potential and believed in me, I built up the courage to give college a second chance.

It was a difficult transition quitting the only job I had known for five years and stepping down to a part-time, work-study job with the college, which does not provide a livable wage. We had to access social services in order to survive and take on the shortage while pursuing an education. We accessed services such as WIC, SNAP, TANF, Medicaid, and we utilized food pantries and charities for the holiday season. Navigating these resources often became a task in itself, and it would be demeaning and belittling, but we knew that it was only temporary while we got through school.

It was intimidating to step foot on a college campus again. I knew the journey was not going to be easy. I had to really balance my time as a young father, an employee, and as a student, among other roles. This would entail waking up at the break of dawn to get myself and my son ready for school, going to work and accomplishing all my tasks in a timely manner, going to school at night, and then finally getting off to put my son to sleep. Studying or doing homework late at night would often lead me into the early morning hours again. It was a relay race every single day until the end of the semester.

Having to worry about food for my family and gas in the tank was a very real fear. During some of the worst moments, I had to rely on emergency funds through my scholarship program and through the Financial Stability Program at the college. The fear of dropping out or failing due to life circumstances was far too real.

After completing my first semester back in school, I was able to earn a 4.0 GPA with the support of the programs and services set in place for a student like me. This was the turning point because I realized that I could be successful in college despite my past stumbles. I learned that failure is the prerequisite for success and that your circumstances do not define how far you will go or what you can achieve in life. I managed to earn the Dean's List for four consecutive semesters and was awarded a total of six scholarships during my time at NOVA. This would help offset the additional costs in college such as textbooks, parking, transportation, online course codes, and many other -- sometimes unexpected -- costs, where students fall short at our institutions. These scholarships afforded me the opportunity to be successful in post-secondary and detract from acquiring massive student loans throughout my time at NOVA.

I still remember walking into to my 6 a.m. calculus class with a hospital band on my wrist, because the day before I had just had my daughter. I had come straight from the hospital to take the exam, because there were no makeup days allowed for exams in that class. On Mother's Day of 2017, all of our hard work paid off. With both of our children in the crowd watching, my spouse and I managed to walk across the graduation stage earning our Associates Degree from Northern Virginia Community College, and we both became the first in our families to earn a college degree. We understood that we did something more than just acquire a degree -- we broke a cycle of educational poverty in our families; we changed the trajectory for the future of our children and grandchildren in our families; and we defeated a stigma that still exists to this day.

I recently started my senior year at George Mason University where I am studying Management in the School of Business. I hope to then transition to a degree in higher education where I can continue to advocate for the underserved student population. After working with so many individuals who are passionate about leveling the playing field, and having been on the frontier of innovative solutions for today's real college students, I am confident that there will be pathways established for students of all backgrounds regardless of the circumstances. We need a system conducive to all students who wish to pursue a post-secondary education and institutions that are in touch with their student population who are at the forefront of addressing these student barriers.

As a young father in college who navigated social services and showed persistence, I was often invited to share my experiences and my journey in college on many stages. I have had the opportunity and privilege to advocate for first-generation Americans, first-generation college students, student parents, teen parents, students of low-income households, working students, and just about all of the demographics that society frequently overlooks and marginalizes at Ascend at The Aspen Institute, The National Center for Student Parent Programs, and at Reach Higher's Beating the Odds Summit with Michelle Obama.

Statistics suggest that students facing these barriers are more likely to drop out. I am honored and proud to say that I beat the odds. I shouldn't have made it as far as I did, yet there are students like me doing so every day. Post-secondary education was not designed for a student of my stature. Having the opportunity to mentor, uplift, and encourage students to pursue their post-secondary education while still being a student at George Mason University has been a true honor. I am inspired and rejuvenated to see so many people root for the "non-traditional student." It has been a wild roller coaster ride for me as a Parent Learner in college, but I know that I am only as successful as the people, programs, and services that are set in place allowed me to be.
