2019-10-17
https://www.indystar.com/story/sports/college/notre-dame/2019/10/17/notre-dame-coach-brian-kelly-got-his-start-womens-softball-coach/3948337002/
SOUTH BEND - Back then some called him "Kelso," and the rookie women's softball coach at tiny Assumption College always seemed to know just what to say.

Even at 21, Brian Kelly was a master motivator.

"Being an athlete himself, he just really inspired us," says former third baseman Helen Russell, who played for Kelly his first two seasons. "He brought us to a different level in terms of practicing and working harder for the games. Brian's a winner."

The same age as many of his players as he finished up his political science degree in the spring of 1983, Kelly had been a two-time captain as a linebacker on the Greyhounds' club football team. He brought a different approach than the one employed by the woman who hired him, Rita Castagna, who coached multiple sports and had founded the softball program in 1976.

"Rita would try the angry face and would pull somebody from a game if they didn't do well," pitcher Kathryn (Mama) Hubbard recalls. "Brian would do humor, he really would. Or maybe sarcasm or teasing, that kind of thing."

As Kelly enters the University of Cincinnati Hall of Fame this weekend along with his 2009 Bearcats team -- the last one he coached before landing his dream job at Notre Dame a decade ago -- he will reflect on a coaching journey that has taken him through Division II Grand Valley State and Central Michigan of the Mid-American Conference.

But it all began back at Assumption College, a Catholic liberal arts school in Worcester, Mass., close to his boyhood roots in towns such as Chelsea and Danvers. And it started with Division II women's softball, which he coached for five seasons from 1983-87.

"We practiced in the front of the university, and it wasn't even a softball diamond," recalls Kelly, who turns 58 next week. "It was rocks. But they didn't care. They just wanted to play softball."

The Assumption archives are a bit misleading.

They say Castagna, a member of both the Assumption College and Sons of Italy Hall of Fame (where she's the only woman inductee), coached softball through the 1983 season, which saw the Greyhounds go 21-5, reach the NCAA Tournament and set a school record for winning percentage which still stands.

Actually, she handed the keys to Kelly before that season started. Her duties in athletic administration were expanding - she would later become one of the first female athletic directors in the country, holding the position at Assumption from 1986-2003 - and she needed someone she could trust to do right by a talent-laden team with seven seniors in the starting lineup.

That person, she quickly determined, was Kelly. He had dated one of her basketball players, and his college roommate had dated one of the softball players, so he was a known quantity on the cozy campus with an undergraduate enrollment of about 2,100.

Castagna recalls him as a "very mature 21-year-old who was respected on the football field as a player." The late Bernie Gaughan, who would hire Kelly as a football assistant after going from defensive coordinator to head coach in 1983, recommended the budding young coach.

Kelly also worked as a residential director and a security guard and even coached middle-school girls' basketball to make ends meet.

Gaughan remained a trusted mentor until his death at age 80 last November, on the eve of Notre Dame's Senior Night win over Florida State.

"(Kelly's) patience and skillful teaching methods gave me an insight into what I might expect from him as my softball coach," Castagna, 76, says via email from her vacation in Aruba. "He had surely enough knowledge of the game of baseball and easily transferred that over into the game of softball."

Title IX had been law for just over a decade, and women were still fighting for opportunities at every level of competitive sports. Kelly's competitive nature ensured the Greyhounds would continue to take their sport as seriously as ever.

"My advice was to not baby the girls because they were girls -- make them do the work necessary to succeed," Castagna says. "His strategy with the women was the same as if he were training the guys. He didn't hesitate to make the women work as hard as was necessary to get the job done. There was no holding back when it came to training."

Kelly, who had no assistant of his own, was a whirlwind of activity that spring. He would hit fungoes and throw batting practice, tweak batting stances, catch Hubbard's warmups without catching gear and structure conditioning drills that kept the team pointed toward success.

One freezing day he even had his outfielders practicing diving catches into banks of snow. There were too many rocks on the makeshift field to run such drills on a clear day.

Castagna, who remained a behind-the-scenes mentor but otherwise gave Kelly full autonomy, was impressed with the young man she called "my little protégé."

"I didn't worry for one day with Brian at the helm," she says. "because I saw him in action for a few days when I realized I could depend on him to do the job with great confidence."

She gave the young coach her entire $1,000 stipend for coaching the team.

"Before you knew it, he was doing all the work," she says. "His real success was jumping into the ring immediately, not as an assistant but (as) head honcho. He actually owns that record."

Kelly's sideline excitability surfaced early. His former softball players smile knowingly when they see him on national television emoting and twisting his body into pretzel shapes.

"It's just so funny," says Russell, an archival producer of sports documentaries who has worked for HBO and NFL Films as well as World Team Tennis and Billie Jean King. "You see him on the sidelines now, he's in the same position he was when you were rounding third coming home for Assumption on the softball field. It's the same mannerisms, the same focus, the same intensity."

An Assumption hall of famer who threw two no-hitters and went 15-4 as a senior in 1983, Hubbard would be reminded of Carlton Fisk's famous Game 6 home run for the Boston Red Sox in the 1975 World Series.

"My God, the windmill (Kelly) would get going!" Hubbard says. "And his face would get all red and he was jumping. It was Carlton Fisk, but more animated than that. He was coming down the line with you."

Kelly jokes that he was a "bad third-base coach" because he "had too many girls thrown out at home plate."

Even so, Castagna says she never felt compelled to step in and ask Kelly to tone it down, even as he struggled to a 7-12 record with a revamped roster in 1984. That would be his only losing season as a softball coach and one of just three overall, with 2004 at Central Michigan and 2016 at Notre Dame.

"Brian's intensity was strong," she says. "He showed great patience while demanding great results. He didn't need to be reined in. His enthusiasm was apparent but certainly not to the point of being high strung. I don't recall any ejections, but if it happened it would have been because of his need to emphasize what was right."

Kelly's mound visits were often memorable, which should come as no surprise to any of his quarterbacks through the years. Pitch counts were not a thing back then.

"We'd just go by feel: 'OK, are you going to get out of this inning or not?'" Hubbard recalls. "The pep talk at the mound, of course, he would be very stern but then he would throw a joke in there or something. He had a really good balance that way."

From the outset, it seems Kelly was able to dance on that fine line between pushing too hard and not hard enough.

"I'm sure dealing with women was a completely difference dynamic for him," says Hubbard, a retired IT executive who now does volunteer work with the elderly in Peabody, Mass. "I don't want to make it sound soft, but it was a little more nurturing than he probably is now."

His players appreciated the respect Kelly showed them and returned it in kind.

"He was just a classy guy," Russell says. "You just knew he was going to do something with his life. he was driven. He was optimistic. He was smart. He was so obviously great at relationships. That's part of coaching, isn't it? It's knowing how to motivate and what you need to do to motivate each individual."

Some of the best stories from Kelly's softball days involve his driving.

The hulking white, 15-passenger team van could grow quite noisy as the Greyhounds made their way to road games around the Northeast. Kelly famously surprised his players after one tough loss with a stop at the McDonald's drive-through, where he ordered burgers for the team.

Kelly smiles when asked if he remembers that day.

"Oh, yeah, absolutely," he says. "We did anything that we could on a limited budget. Those gals were so fun to coach because they knew at the end of the day we were going to find ways to make it work for them through the meagerest of funds."

Then there's the famous chant of "Curb It!" which started after Kelly, rushing his squad to a game on an unfamiliar campus, cut a corner a little too tight. The fact he was able to laugh at himself turned that moment into a "rallying cry," Hubbard recalls.

"Oh, yes, absolutely, we had to remind him each and every time," she says. "And then he would purposely curb it. It became like the good-luck charm. That was embracing the embarrassment, right? If somebody's going to tease you about something, you've got to own it. So, he took it from then on."

Asked about his trouble with the curb, Kelly pleads ignorance.

"Maybe I got a ticket once coming back from North Carolina," he says.

His driving, he insists with a laugh, was "probably not as bad as it's been embellished."

Maybe there was a dual purpose to the pregame "Hail Mary" that Kelly instituted in the Assumption dugout. As the team huddled and joined hands, Kelly would say, "Mary Queen of Victory ... " and wait for the shouted response of "Pray for us!"

At the end of his debut season, the Greyhounds took up a special collection to buy the rookie coach a religious chain. The call-and-response of that dugout chant was printed on each side of the medal.

Over his final three seasons as a softball coach, Kelly would build his win totals to 16, 18 and finally 23. If you include the 1983 season, his five-year record should be 85-59, a winning percentage of .590.

Even as his football coaching duties expanded under Gaughan, Kelly continued coaching softball until he landed an assistant coaching job for $12,000 a year at Grand Valley State in faraway Michigan.

"It seemed to me to be inevitable that he would go on to great places," Castagna says.

Kelly, inducted into the Assumption College Athletics Hall of Fame in 2006, sent along a congratulatory video for Castagna's induction in 2015. She has yet to see him coach in person since he moved to Notre Dame, but Castagna never misses a Fighting Irish game on TV.

"He is the prize of Assumption and its pride and joy," she says. "I was glad to be able to give him his first head coaching opportunity. I'm so proud to have had him as my coach first."

Kelly's connection to his alma mater remains strong. In the spring of 2014, he welcomed a large contingent from Assumption to Notre Dame for a reception, campus tour and VIP treatment at the Blue-Gold Game.

"That was the most amazing thing," says Hubbard, whose cousin Laurie is married to Doug Flutie, the former Heisman Trophy winner turned Notre Dame game analyst on NBC. "Brian comes in with his henchmen, and he's the big man on campus. There were a lot of alumni, of course, and they all want to touch him and talk to him and give him advice."

After speaking to the group, which included Assumption's president and other bigwigs, Kelly broke off to catch up a bit with his first group of athletes. He made sure Beth Rex, his longtime director of football administration, treated his former softball players to field passes for the spring game as well as tours of the team locker room and his office.

"There was quite obviously a recognition on his face of, 'Wait a minute, these aren't the typical alumni. These are my friends,'" Hubbard says. "It was really cool because we flashed back 30 years, you know? It sounds corny, but he didn't forget where he came from."

Russell, whose grandfather Raymond Schaub was a 1917 Notre Dame graduate and later contributed millwork to Notre Dame Stadium, says of Kelly: "It's like a perfect story, isn't it? It's amazing when you think about all he's done. He worked hard to get there. He's inspiring, and I think we're all looking for inspiration."

They repaid "Kelso" for this hospitality in classic style. In addition to lying down on the locker room floor and taking pictures with the Notre Dame logo, they papered his spacious office with tiny pink post-it notes, each bearing a special message and hidden in the unlikeliest of places.

"We just wrote silly things to make him laugh and put them in places where he would find them later, like behind his whiteboard with the closed doors," Hubbard says. "We all reached back into something that meant something to each of us."

Russell, the quiet one, hatched the idea.

"Helen's a little instigator," Hubbard says. "It was hysterical."
