2019-10-17
https://www.gossipcop.com/robert-de-niro-divorce-assistant-lawsuit/
"Raging De Niro Blows His Top!" reads a headline in the latest issue of the National Enquirer. The legendary actor has been going through a divorce from his wife of more than 20 years, and earlier this month, his former assistant sued him for alleged gender discrimination and wage violations. According to the magazine, De Niro's pals now fear his "anger is eating him alive."

"He can't handle these women coming after him and his money," an alleged insider tells the outlet. "The pressure of knowing he could lose all his money to these women has him going ballistic over almost everything." From there, a "mental health expert" who's never treated or met De Niro suggests he should seek professional help "for his own sake as well as for the people around him." This medical professional is basing their opinion on the Enquirer's account of the situation, which isn't true.

Gossip Cop ran the tabloid's report by De Niro's spokesperson, who tells us on the record it's "100 percent fabricated." The actor's rep, who's qualified to speak on his behalf, adds, "There is no basis for these false claims." The unreliable outlet is simply trying to exploit the actor's personal and legal issues. A divorce and a lawsuit would take a toll on anyone, but we're assured De Niro has his emotions completely under control, and no one in the actor's inner circle is worried about his mental state.

As opposed to having a breakdown, De Niro has been busy promoting his upcoming Netflix movie The Irishman, recently attending red carpet premieres in New York City and London. The actor has also been on the talk show circuit, with recent appearances on The Tonight Show and The Graham Norton Show. De Niro has been quite jovial while promoting the movie. Sure, he might be one of the greatest actors of all time, but it's hard to imagine even De Niro could keep it together if he was in the midst of an angry breakdown and spiraling out of control.

This wouldn't be the first time the Enquirer has attempted to create drama in the actor's life. Last year, Gossip Cop busted the magazine for falsely claiming De Niro was feuding with Cher because she was denied a table at one of the restaurants he owns. The publication simply knows nothing about the actor's personal life.
