2019-10-18
https://www.nj.com/atlantic/2019/10/staffers-levy-more-charges-against-atlantic-county-prosecutor-call-for-state-to-fire-him.html
Three women who worked with the Atlantic County prosecutor are demanding the state Attorney General remove him from his position after new allegations of misconduct arose.

The letter penned by their attorneys this week, which was leaked to news reporters, comes one year after their initial complaint that Prosecutor Damon Tyner engaged in mortgage fraud, corruption and gender discrimination.

They now question how Attorney General Gurbir can allow Prosecutor Damon Tyner to remain in his job, especially as more people have reportedly come forward with allegations of misconduct.

The allegations include claims he lied to residents for political gain when he said he discovered investigators under a previous prosecutor were marking homicide case files NIM for "non important murder" when the victims were people of color. It also said he squashed a voter fraud investigation to help ally and then-mayor Frank Gilliam Jr., who recently pleaded guilty to wire fraud and resigned.

The women filed a federal lawsuit against Tyner last fall claiming gender discrimination and retaliation following their initial complaint to the AG's office. They are Diane Ruberton, a former first assistant prosecutor fired after making complaints about Tyner; Heather McManus, a former detective lieutenant who retired last year; and Donna Fetzer, a chief assistant prosecutor who still works in the office.

Brown & Connery, the law firm representing Tyner, said he "vigorously denies these allegations" and will mount a defense in court, not in the media.

The Attorney General's Office declined to comment for this story.

The letter refers extensively to reporting by BreakingAC.com that showed how Tyner, while speaking to a largely minority crowd in Atlantic City July 8, claimed that he found homicide files marked NIM and was told by a former staffer that it stood for "non important murders."

His words and crowd's angry reaction were captured on video. "I sought out to change that. And every murder is important," he can be heard saying.

The claim angered current and former police officers, BreakingAC reported, and Tyner's office and his brother later admitted there were no such files.

"These comments were made at a time when trust between the community and law enforcement is critical, especially in Atlantic City, yet the purpose of his words was plainly to create mistrust between community members and law enforcement," the attorneys wrote in the letter. "He continually attempts to aggrandize himself, not act for the betterment of the community."

In regards to alleged political favoritism, the attorneys, Michelle J. Douglass and Phillip S. Burnham II, claim in the letter that Tyner refused to let McManus investigate complaints and video evidence suggesting Gilliam had engaged in voter fraud when he was elected. She believes Tyner's connection to the Democratic party in Atlantic City motivated him.

Gilliam was recently convicted of embezzling $85,000 from a nonprofit youth organization and resigned after the Attorney General took action to remove him.

The letter also alleges that "various law enforcement officers," attorneys, private citizens and a local doctor have made additional official complaints against Tyner alleging "similar grossly disturbing prosecutorial misconduct."

Among them are allegations by a judge who claims Tyner violated federal law by disclosing confidential information from a grand jury investigation, the letter said.

"We suggest that Prosecutor Tyner should be removed from office, as he is not truthful to the public and has clearly violated his constitutional duties as the chief county law enforcement officer," the lawyers wrote. "At a minimum, a monitor should be put in place to oversee the ACPO until you conduct a thorough and independent investigation to be concluded in a timely manner."

In addition to gender discrimination and retaliation, the 100-page lawsuit filed in January accused Tyner of committing mortgage fraud with his father-in-law, abusing his power to help friends and politically-connected people out of legal trouble, hiring his brother and other people he was connected to, and directing his staff to hide information from the defense in the prominent trial of the murderer of April Kauffman.
