2019-10-16
https://www.theday.com/article/20191016/OP04/191019573
Recently, President Donald Trump suggested on Twitter that the country may have to endure a civil war should he be impeached and removed from office. Trump's exact Tweet: "If the Democrats are successful in removing the President from office (which they will never be), it will cause a Civil War-like fracture in this Nation from which our Country will never heal."

Not the wisest proclamation from our 45th President considering the tension this country currently confronts.

But while the idea of two present-day antagonistic armies, stocked with U.S. citizens, clashing over different convictions under two opposing flags, seems highly unlikely, the potential for American-on- American violence cannot be dismissed. In fact, we've witnessed it.

America teeters on an inflammable cache of TNT - disguised as the thought police - waiting for a spark. Yes, venomous rhetoric bubbles from both sides, but one group thrives on violent confrontation and intolerance of differing views: Antifa. These current day "Brownshirts" are a plague on the freedoms American Patriots have fought and died for. They claim to be anti-fascists, but in fact seek to silence anyone who challenges their far-left, often anarchist, ideology.

The left, rightfully, condemns far-right, white nationalistic organizations that espouse violence and confrontation. But when the antifa terrorists are brutally attacking conservatives, Democratic leaders remain silent.

Washington state police were told to "Stand Down," while the elderly were intimidated and innocent citizens openly attacked by antifa. Only recently there were ugly clashes in Portland, Wash. and in Minnesota.

The group is a left-leaning, anti-racist assemblage supposedly monitoring and tracking the activities of local neo-Nazis. The problem is these Nazi hunters have become the Nazis. They have adopted gestapo-like tactics of terror. These groups are random, without an internal hierarchy but still ferocious. Antifa is unwavering in blocking the one most fundamental freedom all Americans share: Free speech. They are a dangerous, vicious, uncontrollable group, often hiding behind the anonymity of masks. They have infiltrated many college campuses.

Smashing windows and setting fires forced the cancellation of a speech by alt-right activist Milo Yiannopoulos in February and Ann Coulter in April at the University of California at Berkeley. Over the summer, Antifa forces protested a pro-Trump Free Speech Event and a Patriot Prayer gathering with violence to the extent the police finally responded with flash grenades and pepper balls.

The violent antics of antifa should no more be tolerated than those of nationalistic hate groups. If not, the violence in the streets could escalate from a pushback against these street thugs. The conservative right, comprised of men and women who work, go to church, raise families and pay taxes, will not be bullied by these cowards.
