2019-10-17
https://www.ft.com/content/80718674-ef38-11e9-a55a-30afa498db1b
"You can't be what you can't see" is a phrase that is said time and time again.

In 2014, when I was on the graduate scheme at Deutsche Bank, Anne-Marie Imafidon, chief executive of Stemettes, which encourages girls to pursue careers in science, technology, engineering and maths, was also working there. I didn't meet her at the time, but I did read an internal intranet article about her and her career.

Learning at 21 about the career of a young black woman thriving in a traditionally white male-dominated industry was one of the most influential things that ever happened to me. It helped me with my sense of self and gave me confidence that it was possible to do well in the office and work on a personal external project at the same time.

Role models can play a central role in shaping a young professional's career. They are especially important if you belong to an under-represented group for whom a lack of representation in the workplace can lead to feeling isolated and lacking in confidence. They can help those just starting out, whether or not they are a graduate like I was, to believe in their own abilities.

By providing a template for success, role models can also help you visualise your own goals. A 2015 study on role models makes the point: "[the] power of role models can be harnessed to increase role aspirants' motivation, reinforce their existing goals, and facilitate their adoption of new goals".

Although it's 2019, there are still important firsts happening for women in business that in turn inspire others. When Audrey Gelman, CEO of the all-women work hub The Wing, made history this month as the first visibly pregnant woman to appear on the cover of a business magazine, it went viral. She received admiration and support online from many high-profile women, including Hillary Clinton who posted it on Instagram.

But there's a growing need to have accessible role models. The Alison Rose Review of Female Entrepreneurship investigated the disparity between female and male entrepreneurs and found that a lack of relatable role models is one of five key barriers that lead to lower rates of entrepreneurship among women.

Given the tendency to airbrush and exaggerate success stories, hearing from women who talk honestly about the challenges they have faced, either when starting a business or forging a new career path, is much more effective. A study revealed that 70 per cent of girls say they think differently about their futures after hearing from women role models.

My professional aspirations have been shaped by having black British business role models such as serial beauty entrepreneur Sharmadean Reid and WPP UK country manager and chairwoman of MediaCom Karen Blackett. I have more than one role model because I admire the qualities and strengths of different people.

Also, role models don't have to have the identical background to yourself, they just need to inspire you. Regardless of what stage of your career you are at, role models can help you learn and develop your own style and voice, though it is best to avoid a copy and paste approach.

"Do you ever feel like there's a burden to be a role model?" I was asked last week on a panel. I paused and replied that ultimately, it is a privilege to be considered as such but I'm also very aware of the risk of being put on a pedestal and being held to an impossible standard.

I'm frequently asked about what businesses could be doing to increase gender and racial diversity in the workplace. A good starting point is to actively promote, support and amplify the voices of the people in the organisation that are leading positive change and inspiring others. This makes a real difference. Unlike the tokenism I still come across, which results in individuals being made the lone representative for a group without real support from the organisation.

When leadership that supports change is recognised, it encourages new talent and helps lift the glass (sometimes concrete) ceiling from over others' heads. It encourages the next generation. That's why role model lists such as the Empower Ethnic Minority Leaders list, or the Heroes Champions of Women in Business list are important.

Events such as Black History month, Women's History month and LGBT Pride month raise the profile of particular groups. However, businesses should celebrate these groups and promote role models from them throughout the year. Support for everyone should be woven into the fabric of any inclusive workplace that values and champions its people.

Things came full circle for me when I interviewed Ms Imafidon for my book in 2017. I was able to tell her of the incredible impact her authenticity, passion and confidence had had on me as a graduate trainee and how grateful I will always be for that.
