2019-10-19
https://vaaju.com/train-before-breakfast-for-deep-and-positive-changes/
The study finds that those who exercise before breakfast burn twice as much fat as those who exercise after.

We hear a lot about miraculously strenuous ways to burn fat - pills, drinks, supplements, superfoods, you name it - and most of them turn out to be little more than pipe dreams. But now researchers from the University of Bath and Birmingham seem to have found in a way that people can actually burn twice as much fat for the same effort - no miracle drink required.

This trick? Exercise on an empty stomach. Yes, you still need to exercise - but if you are already exercising, according to the study, you can double some of the benefits by simply adjusting the timing.

The study included 30 men who were classified as obese or overweight, and compared results from two intervention groups (who ate breakfast before / after exercise) and one control group (which did not make any lifestyle changes), explains the University of Bath.

After six weeks, they concluded that the participants who exercised before breakfast burned twice the amount of fat than the group who exercised after breakfast. They found that this happened due to lower insulin levels during exercise after attaching, which means that more of the fat from fat tissue and the fat in the muscles was used as fuel.

The researchers found that the muscles from the group that trained before breakfast were more sensitive to insulin compared to the group that trained after breakfast, even though they had had exactly the same exercise and food intake. The muscles of the practitioners before breakfast also had greater increases in important proteins, especially those involved in delivering glucose from the blood to the muscles

changes to your general health, "said Dr. Javier Gonzalez of the Department of Health at the University of Bath.

"We found that the men in the study who exercised before breakfast burned twice as much fat than the group who trained," he added. "More importantly, although this had no effect on weight loss, it dramatically improved their overall health."

And yes, there it is: There was no difference in weight loss. But that practitioners were better able to respond to insulin before breakfast means that they could better keep blood sugar levels under control and potentially lower the risk of diabetes and heart disease. Quite remarkable just for changing exercise time compared to eating.

That study included only men is a bit of a bummer for women looking for a similar health boost, but they decided to focus on men just to test the proof of principle. They promise that future studies will explore the same principle for different groups, including women.

"This work suggests that conducting exercise in a fixed position overnight can increase the health benefits of exercise for individuals without altering the intensity, duration or perception of their effort," said co-author Dr. Gareth Wallis of the University of Birmingham. "We must now examine the effects of this type of long-term training and whether women benefit in the same way as men."

In the meantime, I will continue to work out before breakfast ̵

The study was published in the Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism.
