2019-10-19
https://forums.onlinebookclub.org/viewtopic.php?t=115192&p=1281724#p1281724
[Following is a volunteer review of "From Liberty to Magnolia: In Search of the American Dream" by Janice S. Ellis.]

From Liberty to Magnolia: In Search of the American Dream by Janice S. Ellis, chronicles the author's journey from her father's farm house in rural Mississippi to a successful career in corporate America. Dr. Ellis grew up in Mississippi, the epicenter of racial hatred, with the two-pronged disadvantage of being black and a woman. Her life was superimposed on the tumultuous political landscape of America. The civil rights movement was at its peak and the women's liberation movement was gaining momentum. Dr. Ellis reminisces about the societal biases, mistreatment doled-out to the black community by white racists, and the racial discrimination in academic institutions and political offices. In this persuasive narrative, Dr. Ellis shows her readers how she overcame the circumstances of her birth to reach the pinnacle of success. She talks about the defining moments that nudged her to become a political columnist and use the power of her words to uplift the black community.

I loved the way Dr. Ellis has pointed out the male misogyny by narrating experiences from her own abusive relationships. I also found the Plexiglas metaphor used in reference to the snags that women face while ascending corporate ladders extremely relatable. In general, I felt that the author was more comfortable talking about her professional life than her personal life. She writes in great details about her days in the Mayor's office and Telgar Pharmaceuticals. She not only explains her work profile, but also writes about Telgar's management philosophy. However, she shares only a few anecdotes from her personal life. These anecdotes are undoubtedly heart-wrenching, but not enough to allow a stronger connect with the author.

What I disliked the most in the book was that the pace of the narrative was not maintained. While talking about a particular event in her life, the author showed propensity to slip into a completely different time frame, making it difficult to place the happenings in a chronological order. This has also caused a lot of repetition, with same evidences provided to support different messages. Similarly, I saw no point in providing the excerpts from the commentaries delivered by Dr. Ellis on WISN Radio ( chapter 7) when her entire commentaries have been made available in the appendices. The author has also dedicated one entire chapter to pursue an academic discussion on the political philosophy of Walter Lippmann. Though I realize that she wanted the readers to know where she derived her inspiration for being a political columnist from, this section added no value to the story. I remained absorbed in the first half of the story, especially in the sections where Dr. Ellis writes about her abusive marriage and single-handedly raising two sons. But I did not remain as interested in the middle sections where the author has written excessively about Mr. Lippmann.

For the reasons stated above, I would rate the book 3 out of 4 stars. Dr. Ellis's story is poignant and is told passionately. However, the story would have gotten a better structure with some skilled editing. The story would have done much better without the academic deliberations that kept breaking the pace of the narrative.

I highly recommend this uplifting read. The book would be especially inspiring for black women still struggling against the evils of racism and gender discrimination. However, I would also recommend this book to women worldwide, irrespective of their race. Americans concerned with America's future, policy makers, students of history and politics, columnists, and many such people in position of making a positive difference would also find something of value in this book.

******

From Liberty to Magnolia: In Search of the American Dream

View: on Bookshelves | on Amazon | on iTunes
