2019-10-18
https://www.whimn.com.au/talk/think/what-is-the-nofap-movement-and-should-you-stop-masturbating/news-story/c6cea9951d06593e7997125ff8b5b532
Friends, when I heard that women were joining a male initiated movement that outlawed masturbation, alarm bells started ringing. When the ringing eventually stopped (this literally took days), I had one thought: Not On My Watch.

NoFap.com (a slang term for masturbation) is a website with 450,000 members, offering tools and information to millions of visitors each month who believe they are suffering from porn addiction and compulsive sexual behaviours.

The website was founded by Alexander Rhodes, who believes he became addicted to pornography at a young age. In an interview with The New York Times in 2016, Mr Rhodes explained that when he was 11 he accidentally clicked on an internet ad which took him to violent pornography images. Throughout his adolescent years he habitually accessed free, high definition internet porn, and by college he was masturbating to internet porn up to 14 times a day. Distressed and unable to quit, in 2011 he started a discussion forum on Reddit about his struggles, and soon after quit his job at Google to found the NoFap website.

NoFap advocates a process of recovering from porn addiction referred to as "rebooting". Rebooting involves abstaining from pornography, masturbation, or even sex altogether for at least 90 days. This apparently restores jammed up neural pathways back to "factory settings", and frees users from porn addition and porn-induced sexual dysfunction.

Many men who subscribe to NoFap believe that abstaining from masturbation leads to an increase in testosterone, and will continue to abstain indefinitely. These 'Fapstronauts' boast of a complete personality change and boost in confidence and energy that then leads to success in every area of life. There are numerous youtube videos documenting the transformation of skinny, pimply, porn addicted young men who hate their girlfriends, to become a superstar at life, and an instant chick magnet.

If you think this approach sounds pretty male centric, then you're right. If you also think men giving up porn and masturbation so that they can boost their testosterone and attract more women for sex sounds like the height of hypocrisy, you'd also be right.

In fact, research conducted in 2015 published in the Journal of Sex Research shows that men who view porn frequently have more egalitarian and feminist views about women, than men who abstain.

Women are joining NoFap because they think porn is negatively affecting their lives (even the mild users), and for the lifestyle improvements that are touted to come with abstinence.

A couple of years ago, NoFap user 'Kristel' documented her transformation in a youtube video which has now attracted 1.4 million views. She does look great in the video - white peasant top, clear, acne free skin, freshly washed hair. To me, she looks fresh from a multiple orgasm self-pleasure sesh with her favorite vibrator, followed by a hot shower and blow dry. But that can't be - she's a NoFapper.

Before giving up porn and masturbation, Kristel had self esteem issues, acne, anxiety, and body image issues. And while did not believe she was heavily addicted to porn, did use it and masturbation as a way to escape. Since she's said no to those faps, she's experienced a spike in motivation, she's ticking off her to do lists, she's happier, more confident, the list goes on. She finds that a cold shower puts a stop to any annoying urges, and she says that her vagina is also looking a lot nicer.

Kristel recommends NoFap for anyone who feels unhealthy or depressed or for those with social anxieties. Interestingly, she doesn't specifically recommend it for people struggling with unhealthy porn habits.

NoFap's claims that porn changes your brain, and that your brain then requires a 'reboot', are currently unfounded.

Following a review of recent research in to porn, greymattersjournal.com concluded that "scientific evidence of pornography's neurological effects remains inconclusive."

According to PornHub, in 2018 there were 28.5 billion visits to the site - or 81 million searches a day, 50,000 searches a minute. Violence in pornography, the lack of content aimed at women, and concerns relating to the regulation of the industry and the health and safety of workers, mean it is far from perfect. But with those kind of numbers for just one site, it does seem to be here to stay.

Commentary around pornography is controversial, and there are a lot of hysterical claims about it being addictive, and the cause of so many social ills. The effect of porn on people who are susceptible to developing unhealthy habits around it, and certainly young people's access to porn and the effect on developing brains, are important areas for ongoing research and regulation.

Want to go steady? Sign up to our whimn.com.au newsletter for more stories like this.

NoFap seems to mainly benefit members by re-focusing them on a healthier approach to all aspects of life - the abstinence part may just be the gimmicky hook.

Just going out on a limb here, but I'm thinking you could enjoy your erotica and your masturbation while also making any needed improvements to diet, exercise, and your social life.

And studies show that while women are masturbating more than ever we are still doing it less than men. Women who aren't masturbating very often are also less likely to be having sex in their relationship. A fulfilling sex life, solo or with your partner, has a range of health benefits.

So if we want to break the masturbation glass ceiling, and reap the multi-orgasmic benefits, it seems abstinence is the last thing we should be trying to do.
