2019-10-17
https://www.fastcompany.com/90417642/discrimination-in-the-hiring-process-is-more-prevalent-than-you-might-think
At this point, many employers have already heard about the benefits of diversity, particularly how it can drive innovation and even boost profits. But despite the increased attention to diversity and inclusion, many organizations are still struggling to hire and retain a truly diverse workforce. While there are a number of different contributing factors, one of the most important occurs right at the start: discrimination in the hiring process.

We reached out to a handful of recruiting and HR experts to get their best tips on how employers can nip bias in the bud -- here's the advice they shared.

Discrimination in the hiring process often begins before a candidate even applies. Many employers promote job postings that contain loaded language, even if they're not aware of it. Taking the extra time to craft a sensitive job description will ensure that candidates from all backgrounds feel welcome to apply.

On a basic level, this includes things like not using gendered language (e.g. "the candidate will report to his manager") in job descriptions. But even seemingly innocuous language like "rock star" or "world-class" can affect who feels comfortable applying to these types of jobs -- aggressive language, superlatives, and nontraditional job titles all tend to favor men. If you're unsure of whether or not the language you use in your job description is appropriate, use a tool like Textio tool or the free Gender Decoder.

Beyond gender discrimination, it's also important to avoid age discrimination in your job descriptions.

"It is common for employers to run ads that have . . . a disparate impact on older workers. An example would be a job listing restricted to 'recent grads' or 'Class of 2018 or 2019'" or 'digital natives,'" says David Miklas, an attorney who specializes in labor and employment law.

Many of the résumé components that employers view as a marker of high quality, like continuous employment or a degree from a prestigious university, can actually exclude otherwise qualified candidates from underrepresented backgrounds.
