2019-10-18
https://www.entrepreneur.com/slideshow/340991
The movement to achieve equal opportunities for women has made incredible progress. But even in 2019 women reportedly still earn about 80 cents for every dollar a man makes. On Women's Equality Day, 8/26, Authority Magazine launched a series called "5 Things We Need To Do To Close The Gender Wage Gap."

In this series, scores of prominent women leaders shared their insights about necessary steps to narrow and eventually close the gender wage gap. Here are some highlights.

These interviews have been edited for length and clarity.

1. I would say that it's so important that women advocate for each other and openly discuss money with their peers, male and female. I remember early in my career discovering that my male coworker was being paid considerably more than I was and using this information to leverage a raise. There's definitely a stigma associated with talking about money, but those uncomfortable conversations will help you negotiate better.

2. Negotiate. It's shocking how many women will accept an initial offer and not ask for more money. Something I've learned from my co-host Becca Freeman is that a lot of the time, the hiring manager has a bigger budget and actually expects you to negotiate. This revelation really stuck with me and is so simple but incredibly powerful. We've since had countless listeners tell us that after listening to that episode they were able to negotiate a raise.

1. I think the gender wage gap is caused by a combination of factors, the largest of them being institutionalized gender discrimination. Put simply, women have been paid less than men for years, and changing this standard will not happen overnight. I still can't believe that it was less than 100 years ago that women earned the right to vote in our country, but that's the way it is. Women have traditionally been seen as mothers first and breadwinners second, and even in modern-day America, this underlying perception of our roles in society persists. So we're held up against this standard of being able to raise children while simultaneously excelling at the office. I don't mean to blame all of this on men, either. We women hold ourselves and each other to extremely high standards, and we're really hard on one another. If we're too focused on our careers, we're bad mothers and wives. If we're too focused on raising our families, we aren't putting enough effort in at work. And I think we hold ourselves back sometimes too. Whether we don't think we're good enough for the promotion we want, or we don't think we're qualified to be managing men, we sell ourselves short and actually get in our own way.

2. I would challenge women first to start pursuing the jobs that they are passionate about, whether or not those jobs fall within traditionally male-dominated fields. I started in the tech world at a young age and worked really hard to get to where I am today, but I realize how intimidating those industries can be. Success in these fields for women isn't impossible, but I think too many of us women assume it won't be worth the hard work. We think that we won't be considered for a role because of our gender or will be immediately out-qualified by the men in the room. This is evident in the fact that women only apply for jobs they are 100 percent qualified for, while men apply for jobs even if they only meet 60 percent of the required skills. We need to start giving ourselves more credit and demanding the respect and job recognition that we deserve.

3. We need to support one another. We need to make sure both men and women alike are supporting women in their endeavors in these traditionally male fields. That being said, if we're going to ask that men respect us in our careers, we need to make sure we as women as giving each other that support and respect as well. I see way too many situations in which women are tearing each other down, and it is so frustrating. We're all up against the same obstacles, and the last thing we need is to add further challenges for our female counterparts.
