2019-10-19
https://www.cntraveller.in/story/15-eco-friendly-vacations-take-across-india-right-now/
When I first caught the travel bug, I never stopped to wonder if travelling had the power to change me. I only considered it a break from life. I stayed in soulless resorts, rejoiced at the sight of familiar food and seldom ventured beyond the advice of a guidebook. It's no wonder that those early trips, designed to escape and not embrace life, lacked meaning, curiosity and introspection.

Over the years, though, exploring the India far off the beaten path with environmentally and socially conscious organisations has not only filled me with awe for our incredible biodiversity and cultural heritage but also made me realise the impact of my travel and life choices.

From the organic way of life in remote mountain hamlets in the Himalayas to the wild forests of Central India, from the unique biodiversity of the Western Ghats to the tribal traditions of the Northeast, India is a treasure trove of rare experiences that are waiting to be unlocked.

Sustainable tourism -- where the money you spend supports local communities and positively contributes to the environment -- isn't a new phenomenon in India. But thanks to social media, travel blogs and the Internet, it has become easier to explore the country more meaningfully. Look out for travel companies and accommodation options that go the extra mile to engage with locals, create livelihood opportunities, source locally, treat animals compassionately, opt for renewable energy, avoid single-use plastic, encourage plant-based eating, actively participate in conservation activities and offer immersive travel experiences that are rooted in the local way of life. We have done part of the homework for you with this list of 15 sustainable trips across India that are good for the planet, good for locals and good for your wanderlusting soul.

It's one thing to explore the rich heritage and local traditions of Rajasthan along with other tourists, quite another to join VegVoyages on an environmentally conscious, cruelty-free journey. Tuck into traditional Rajasthani cuisine, explore vibrant bazaars, cycle with a naturalist in the lush bird sanctuary of Keoladeo National Park and forge great bonds as you volunteer at an animal shelter that rescues baby goats, donkeys, camels, cows and dogs. Animal lovers are in for a treat, for VegVoyages specialises not just in travel free of animal exploitation but also in local vegan meals

Himachal Pradesh Stark mountains, gushing rivers and a fascinating culture that evolved in near-isolation are the hallmarks of this trans- Himalayan region. Practically cut off from the rest of India during winter, Spiti's charming remoteness is best savoured through the lens of social enterprise Ecosphere. On their 'Life as a Local' trip, live in rural mountain homesteads, and learn to eat, breathe, hike and even do your ablutions (in dry composting toilets!) as a local. Trek with one of Spiti's last remaining aamchis (indigenous doctors) to collect wild herbs for concoctions and learn the art of reading a pulse. As locals adopt climate-smart agricultural practices in the face of erratic weather patterns, work alongside them to build check dams to channel snow for irrigation. And when you think about your carbon footprint on this remote, breathtaking journey -- and chances are, you will -- worry not, for Ecosphere endeavours to offset your footprint by routing profits towards solar energy projects across the valley.

Through pristine oak and rhododendron forests, glimpses of the snowclad Gangotri range teased me as I huffed and puffed up steep mountain slopes. The reward of not giving up on the near-eight-hour trek was Dayara Bugyal -- one of Uttarakhand's most spectacular alpine meadows replete with fragrant wildflowers and panoramic views of Mount Bandarpoonch. The highlight of my mountain detox was basing myself at The Goat Village in Raithal, run entirely by the resident women. It was set up by The Green People, an organisation on a mission to enable the reverse migration of Himalayan farmers. Living in the lap of the mountains in wooden cottages with minimal electricity, learning about fast disappearing traditions and fuelling up on native superfoods like jhangora (barnyard millet) and gahat (horse gram), I felt reassured that sustainable travel isn't just the need of the hour but also a more meaningful way to experience the world.

Ditch the jeep safari. Armed with a stick and pepper spray, I set out on foot with a forest ranger and guide into the buffer zone of Satpura National Park, home to Royal Bengal tigers, leopards and bear. I chased alarm calls on the same turf as a wild predator and then found the perfect recovery from the hair-raising adventure: canoeing in the golden morning mist on Denwa River. Better still was cooling off with the local brew mahua on the rooftop of Forsyth Lodge, originally set up by naturalist Hashim Tyabji who was instrumental in developing conservation-focused tourism in Satpura.

In a city that has a sordid track record of women's safety, the Open Eyes Project aims to challenge conventional gender roles through tourism. With a trained local female guide, explore the fascinating neighbourhood of Nizamuddin, listen to qawwallis that will tug at your heartstrings and unearth the area's historical significance in shaping Delhi as we know it today. Given its focus on inclusive tourism -- especially training women and youth from low-income backgrounds -- the project is a chance to get to really know the city, with its grime, charm and history thrown in.

Sustainable living isn't just a buzzword in Meghalaya. Nicknamed 'the abode of clouds', this lush state is home to one of India's richest biodiversity hotspots. The natural environment is deeply intertwined with the lives of the Khasi, Garo and Jaintia tribes, who have conserved both their rainforests and ancient traditions for centuries. Visit the living root bridges before venturing into one of the last remaining homes of the greater one-horned rhinoceros. Journeys with Meaning, a social enterprise, introduces travellers to an Earth-friendly way of life with the wisdom of local communities. Think biodegradable alternatives, organic farming and seeking inspiration from nature for sustainable solutions to the challenges of modern life.

The dense forests of Gujarat's remote and rarely traversed Dangs district are home to the indigenous Dang tribe that keeps alive their simple way of life. Chirag Munjani, founder of Rural Pleasure, chose community-oriented tourism to help create alternative livelihoods in this farming tribe while also introducing city slickers to the joys of rural India. Understand Dang traditions, learn about organic farming, explore the forests with hunters-turned guides, experiment with centuries-old Warli tribal art and try out archery. It is the perfect chance to discover a universe beyond our smartphones.

Founded by Paras Loomba, Global Himalayan Expedition offers no ordinary journey to the Indian Himalayas. Trek along alpine forests and snow-capped mountains to hamlets so secluded that roads, electricity and visitors have yet to arrive. Open yourself to the warmest hospitality in some of India's coldest villages. And as your heart fills with joy, get down to accomplishing the mission of these expeditions: to bring renewable energy to Himalayan villages. It's a true example of how sustainable travel can have a lasting impact -- on us as travellers and the people we meet.

When I set out to journey along Kerala's second-longest river, the Bharathapuzha -- poetically called Nila River -- I imagined capturing its ferocity visually and taking a dip in its waters. But I was saddened to learn that due to rampant sand mining and environmental degradation, the Nila is considered a dying river. Yet, it lives on in the hearts of locals, still inspiring poetry, performing arts, traditional crafts and storytelling. Far off the state tourist map, take this journey into the heart of Palakkad, Thrissur and Mallappuram with The Blue Yonder, a travel company that channels tourism money to support artforms on the verge of extinction. Some of my most memorable experiences include watching the mind-boggling ritual theatre of nangiar koothu, witnessing an oracle in trance and exploring Kerala's waterways in the boat of a former sand smuggler.

In the splendid isolation of Ladakh, it is still taboo for women to work as guides and porters. But one organisation, the Ladakhi Women's Travel Company, founded by writer and female guide Thinlas Chorol, is smashing this gender stereotype. Let Ladakh's own female bravehearts lead you (no matter what gender you identify with) on a journey beyond the ordinary: trans-Himalayan villages stuck in time, hiking trails that belong on the moon, ancient monasteries, glacial lakes, mountain legends and an intimate peek into how sustainability has long been an integral part of life in the mountain desert.

River-rafting down the icy waters of the Ganga might sound adventurous enough, but with Planet Abled, it's even more so, for your raft will be an eclectic mix of differently abled adventurers. The enterprise was founded by Neha Arora, who observed the challenges of travellers with disabilities in her family. It hopes to enable adventure trips for solo and group travellers who may be in a wheelchair, have sight, hearing or speech impairments, or have autism or other cognitive disabilities. While you rejuvenate on the tranquil beaches here, practise yoga in the self-styled capital and savour the evolving health-conscious food scene of Rishikesh, you should know that you are part of India's earliest tryst with barrier-free travel.

Along the shores of Chilika Lake -- Asia's largest brackish-water lake -- sits the fishing village of Odisha's Mangalajodi, a couple of hours' drive from Bhubaneswar or Konark. The local livelihood long depended on poaching of waterbirds on a commercial scale. In perhaps one of the world's greatest conservation success stories -- spearheaded by a local man, Nanda Kishore Bhujbal -- poachers now work as boatmen and birding guides who offer environmentally conscious tours along the lake. As I glided on a rustic wooden boat on the serene waters of Chilika, witnessing the splendour of its winged beauties, I had to take a moment to absorb this great transformation and reflect on the power of tourism to truly affect both human and non-human lives.

At the onset of monsoon, millions of fireflies descend upon Purushwadi, lending a magical aura to this charming hamlet in the Sahyadris. By day, I hiked in the undulating hills, feasted on local mangoes, indulged in sweet and spicy home-cooked Maharashtrian food and learnt how Grassroutes Journeys has brought livelihood opportunities through community-based tourism to little-visited farming villages in Maharashtra and Odisha. By night, under the shimmering dark canvas above, I watched in awe as the forests and valleys came alive with fireflies darting illuminated signals to their mates.

The Gulf of Mannar Marine National Park offers a delightful escape into the ocean, with pristine corals and ample opportunities for kayaking, windsurfing, kitesurfing and sailing. Base yourself at Kathadi North, an eco-friendly homestay in Rameswaram, constructed with local and largely natural materials and run by Quest Expeditions. As you build a deeper connection with the sea, get involved in Quest's mission to introduce the local community to the world of aquatic sports and its economic opportunities. There's one catch though: the youth must pay for their training but with trash instead of cash, which makes for a clever coastal clean-up programme.
