2019-10-17
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/10/17/arts/nyc-this-weekend-childrens-events.html
Our guide to cultural events in New York City for children and teenagers happening this weekend and in the week ahead.

CIVICKIDS CELEBRATION at the Children's Museum of the Arts (Oct. 20, 10 a.m.-5 p.m.). Today's kids are tomorrow's voters, a fact that this museum acknowledged by devoting its 30th-anniversary initiative to encouraging civic engagement. Joining with For Freedoms, an artist-led organization, the museum will celebrate its CIVICKIDS campaign with screenings, workshops and activities. The highlights include a screening of a student-made film about the Climate Museum; storytelling by State Senator Julia Salazar, Democrat of Brooklyn; and the creation of a freedom-themed digital quilt that will consist of visitors' photographs and messages. Children can also make postcards to send to elected officials, design medals from recycled materials and record a podcast about changing the world. And don't forget to investigate "E.V. Day: Breaking the Glass Ceiling," a soon-to-close sculptural installation commenting on both feminism and the environment.

212-274-0986, cmany.org

'COLOR BETWEEN THE LINES' at the Brooklyn Historical Society (Oct. 20, 10:30 and 11:30 a.m.). Color has more than one meaning in this show and educational program. Originally produced in 2012 by the Irondale Ensemble Project, "Color Between the Lines" uses song and narration to tell the true stories of several 19th-century Brooklyn abolitionists, black and white. Irondale has adapted the theater piece into a 25-minute version for families, which the historical society is presenting in conjunction with its series 400 Years of Inequality: Slavery, Race, and Our Unresolved History. (Registration is recommended.) Children, who will be admitted free, will learn about Lewis Tappan, who helped found the American Anti-Slavery Society, and Charles Bennett Ray, a black activist who worked with the Underground Railroad. After the performance, young audience members will create murals of people who inspire them.

718-222-4111, bhsfamily.eventbrite.com

DESIGN FEST at Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum (Oct. 19, 11 a.m.-4 p.m.). National Design Week (Oct. 12-19) has offered many events for adult professionals, but it also brings opportunities for young aspirants to try this exciting field. This free celebration invites children and teenagers to explore the museum and work with National Design Award winners and other guest artists to create projects in almost a dozen workshops. The activities, which encompass subjects like fashion and product design, interior decorating and landscape architecture, include planning a model park, producing prototype eyeglasses, making a two-dimensional Muppet with Sesame Workshop and using a coin cell battery and a motor to engineer a robot that can draw on paper. Also keep in mind that Open House New York Weekend takes place Friday through Sunday, when many buildings, museums and historic houses present special tours and design programs, many of them family-friendly.

212-849-8400, cooperhewitt.org

HARVEST HOMECOMING at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden (Oct. 20, 11 a.m.-5 p.m.). Was there ever a culture that didn't love food? This new festival highlights several harvest traditions, including those of Haitian Vodou, early America and the Jewish holiday Sukkot. Children can press cider, decorate pumpkins, go on horse-drawn hayrides and visit a family fairground that offers carnival games, brussels sprouts bowling, and spinning and weaving demonstrations. Urban Advantage, an educational partnership, will enlist young botanists in a Family Science Day at the conservatory, with plant investigations and dissections, and those who can't wait for end-of-October spookiness can take part in a music-filled Halloween children's costume parade at 4:30 p.m.

718-623-7200, bbg.org

'MOZART: THE MAGIC FLUTE' at the Kaye Playhouse (Oct. 19, 10 and 11:30 a.m.; Oct. 20, 10 and 11:30 a.m. and 1 p.m.). Professor Treblemaker, the mischievous fictional character who hosts the Little Orchestra Society's L.O.S. KIDS series, usually has something up his sleeve, and this weekend that something is pretty big: an opera. In Craig Shemin's script, he wants to hide "The Magic Flute" within a concert setting, and for assistance, he turns to none other than that work's composer, Mozart. It's safe to assume that they, some singers and the society's musicians, led by the guest conductor Carlos Ágreda, will make operatic excerpts blend in easily with the series's usual orchestral fun. Young listeners can also look forward to hearing portions of Mozart's "The Marriage of Figaro" and "Eine Kleine Nachtmusik."

212-971-9500, littleorchestra.org

[Read about the events that our other critics have chosen for the week ahead.]

SCAVENGERS & DECOMPOSERS WEEKEND at Wave Hill (Oct. 19-20, 10 a.m.-4 p.m.). For many kids, nothing says Halloween like a good gross-out. This garden event in the Bronx promises several, but the intent isn't holiday ghoulishness. Rather, Wave Hill plans to illustrate the importance of natural recyclers like dermestid beetles (the flesh-eating variety). Young visitors can observe them in action as well as interview entomologists and handle harmless creatures that break down dead organic material. Other highlights include the Boneyard, where children can try to reassemble an animal skeleton, and Decomposer Detectives Family Walks, in which the object is to seek out creepy-crawlies. Need a costume idea? An art project invites participants to dress up and parade as snags, which are standing dead trees. On Saturday the naturalist Brian Robinson will present Vulture Culture, a program with live birds, and on Sunday Ed McGowan, director of science at the Trailside Museums & Zoo, will host Secret Lives of Scavengers, featuring motion-activated camera images of wildlife consuming dead deer. To quote "The Lion King," it's the circle of life.

718-549-3200, wavehill.org

WEST AFRICAN FAMILY DAY WITH IMANI FAYE at the Joan Weill Center for Dance (Oct. 19, 5-6:30 p.m.). Sometimes an African adventure is only steps away. Ailey Extension, the educational outreach program of Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, will get everyone's feet moving in that direction at this festive family workshop. Open to children 10 and older, the instruction will focus on traditional dances, including two from Guinea: the sofa, which is associated with hunting, and the sinte, which is celebratory. Faye, a performer and choreographer on the Ailey faculty, will teach the moves while the Bambara Drum and Dance Ensemble provides the rhythms.

212-405-9000, aileyextension.com/familyday

WONDERLAND@IACC CHILDREN'S LITERARY FESTIVAL at the Hagop Kevorkian Center for Near Eastern Studies, New York University (Oct. 19, 10 a.m.-4:15 p.m.; Oct. 20, 10 a.m.-12:45 p.m.). The wonderland in the title evokes not only the imaginary realms of children's books but also the richness of a real country: India. Presented by the Indo-American Arts Council and the Culture Tree, an organization devoted to South Asian programs for families, the festival offers readings, discussions and performances for ages 3 to 16 by Indian and Indian-American authors and artists. The events on Saturday will include a talk with Veera Hiranandani, whose novel "The Night Diary" received a 2019 Newbery Honor award, as well as a reading by the actress Sheetal Sheth of her first children's book, "Always Anjali." Sheth's program will be paired with an interactive show from the group Kulture Khazana, which will also perform on Sunday in conjunction with Raakhee Mirchandani's reading of her book, "Super Satya Saves the Day." (A full schedule is on the website.)

212-582-9280, iaac.us

YPC BIG SING at the Gerald W. Lynch Theater at John Jay College (Oct. 19, 3 p.m.). People who love to sing far outnumber those who can do it well. At this event, however, ability doesn't matter. The Young People's Chorus -- whose members perform very well indeed -- is inviting everyone who enjoys belting out a melody to join it in this community singalong. Led by the chorus's artistic director, Francisco J. Núñez, and its associate artistic director, Elizabeth Núñez -- married maestros -- the event will also feature the rapper and composer Nick Demeris and the a cappella group Midtown. The lyrics to all songs will be projected onstage, but amateur vocalists can expect familiar tunes, too, like "If I Had a Hammer" and "That's Amore."

212-279-4200, ypc.org
