2019-10-16
https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-7580953/Hollywood-actor-posed-lingerie-talent-scout-nudes-busty-women-sued-75-000.html
The actor denies he was involved and alleged that someone else was impersonating him to entice the models into giving up their nudes

A Hollywood actor, known for his impersonations, allegedly posed as a lingerie company talent scout to get 'busty' models to give nude pictures of themselves and reveal their intimate details, according to a lawsuit filed by the company he was accused of misrepresenting.

Adore Me filed a copyright infringement suit in federal court in Los Angeles on Monday, accusing Daniel Giovanni Watson of the alleged phishing scheme.

He is accused of impersonating Lindsey Hayes Kroeger, a well-respected talent scout, whom he claimed was working on behalf of Adore Me, to win the confidence of 'busty' models and convince them to send him the nudes.

Daniel Giovanni Watson, a little-known Hollywood actor known for his impersonations, is pictured above. He was slapped with a lawsuit on Monday accusing him of posing as a talent scout for lingerie company Adore Me

Watson , pictured above, told the New York Post that that he had nothing to do with the alleged scheme, and claimed someone was impersonating him

Watson, according to the suit, would initially approach the models as himself, saying he could put them in touch with Kroeger, who in actuality has worked as a casting director, and was involved with Gossip Girl, the teen drama series, and the 2008 film, 'The Strangers.'

The lawsuit alleged Watson then relied on fake emails and bogus social media accounts to lure in the models. Adore Me wants a jury trial to stop him from continuing the overtures to models as a representative of the company and seeks at least $75,000 in damages.

He directed a request for comment to his spokeswoman, when DailyMail.com reached out. The spokeswoman, 'Sabrina,' was not immediately available.

The New York-based Adore Me (pictured above) started up in 2011, claims it has spent $100 million in 'promotion and advertising, has its own social media presence, and provides a 'snark-free, body-positive zone to consumers'

'Adore Me selects models of all body shapes,' and 'never requests nude pictures' from the women that work for the company, it says the complaint. A tweet with one of the company's models is pictured above

Watson did tell the New York Post that that he had nothing to do with the alleged scheme, and claimed someone was impersonating him.

'I guess someone is using my name and my credibility as clout,' he told the Post. 'Somebody else is trying to slander me. I was aware of the situation. I found myself in the middle of a cesspool. I'm an actor.'

Watson added that he thought his agent and lawyer had straightened out the affair with his impersonator. 'This is very shocking,' he said about getting sued.

The lawsuit alleged Watson used Adore Me's name, trademark and reputation to obtain the nudes.

'Defendant has established email and social media accounts and profiles on Google, Instagram, Snapchat, YouTube and Twitter using Ms. Kroeger's name,' says the complaint.

'Adore Me has never sought, nude photographs of women; neither has Ms. Kroeger,' proclaimed the firm in bold lettering in its legal filing.

The New York-based company, which started up in 2011, claims it has spent $100 million in 'promotion and advertising, has its own social media presence, and provides a 'snark-free, body-positive zone to consumers.'

'Adore Me selects models of all body shapes,' and 'never requests nude pictures' from the women that work for the company, it says in the complaint.

Watson (pictured above on the 'Bianca Bee Show' in a segment that focuses on one of his impersonations, appeared in the films 'Canal Street,' and 'Love Triangle,' as well as TV's 'Unsolved: The Murders of Tupac and the Notorious B.I.G.'

Watson, in an alleged text message exchange with one woman (pictured above) that was among several included in the 28-page suit, makes it clear that a friend who also is a talent scout was looking for 'Busty women' [sic]

Watson, in an alleged text message exchange with one woman that was among several included in the 28-page suit, makes it clear that a friend who also is a talent scout was looking for 'busty women' for a bra campaign.

The complaint says he then 'pressures his targets' to write to the friend at a bogus email. He allegedly used the email replies to the models to say successful applicants would get paid from $3000 to more than $8000.

He is alleged to have said that his friend was a 'close casting associate' he had worked with 'many times [sic] who casted me in a few projects.' He is even alleged to have sent screen shots to the models from the friend, informing him of the opportunities.

The alleged phishing scheme would rely on a screenshot of a website with Kroeger's actual work, reads the complaint. Watson is alleged to have told models that there was 'nothing sketchy about her' because she had casted him in the teen drama series Gossip Girl

Sometimes when faced with resistance, Watson allegedly would respond 'NVM' (nevermind)

He would entice the models saying, 'you fit the breakdown,' and would back off if they said they first had to check with their agents and managers. Sometimes when faced with resistance, he allegedly would respond 'NVM' (nevermind).

Follow up emails featured the Adore Me trademark and mentioned a fake casting company, 'LKCASTINGS.'

The correspondence, in poorly written English, would ask for 'snap shots of you braless from waist up and head to toe from front back and each side head to toe [sic].'

The alleged phishing scheme would rely on a screenshot of a website with Kroeger's actual work, reads the complaint. Watson is alleged to have told models that there was 'nothing sketchy about her' because she had casted him in Gossip Girl. The alleged screen credit does not show up on IMDB.

Other follow ups with models include a request for a 15 minute 'video of you,' asking the women to disrobe. The complaint adds that Watson had met some of the models in person at Los Angeles nightclub, Station 1640, where people go to be discovered for 'entertainment work.'

Adore Me said the images Watson was allegedly collecting could be turned around and used vindictively against the models, and pledged in its complaint that any awards that arise from the suit, if it goes to trial, would be given to BadassArmy, a nonprofit devoted to helping the victims of 'revenge porn'.
