2019-10-16
http://groong.usc.edu/news/msg668153.html
Azerbaijan did not support Inter-Parliamentary Union's draft resolution against Turkey

The delegation consisting of the Azerbaijani MPs Shahin Ismayilov, Kamran Bayramov, Sona Aliyeva and Kamran Nabizade is participating in the 141st Assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary Union dedicated to "Role of parliaments and possible mechanisms for strengthening international law, contribution to regional cooperation" in the capital of Serbia - Belgrade, Trend reports referring to the Azerbaijani parliament.

More than 1,700 delegates from 154 countries are participating in the event.

The topic of eliminating gender discrimination was discussed at the Forum of Women Parliamentarians of the Assembly on October 13.

Member of the Azerbaijani delegation Sona Aliyeva spoke at the forum and stressed that women's rights in Azerbaijan were enshrined 101 years ago in the Declaration of Independence.

Aliyeva provided detailed information about the work carried out in Azerbaijan under the leadership of Azerbaijani President Ilham Aliyev in the field of protecting women's rights and about recently adopted laws on women's rights and gender equality.

The member of the Azerbaijani delegation emphasized that the rights of Azerbaijani women and children have been violated as a result of the Armenian aggression against Azerbaijan.

Member of the Azerbaijani delegation, Deputy Chairman of the Parliamentary Committee on Youth and Sports Shahin Ismayilov took part in the Forum of Young Parliamentarians of the Assembly, which was dedicated to the experience of youth policy, achievements in this sphere, prospects for resolving existing problems and upcoming work.

Ismayilov informed the participants about the success of youth policy in Azerbaijan, experience in the work with youth, the projects implemented in this sphere and answered colleagues questions.

During this day, India put forward a draft resolution "Addressing Climate Change"; France, Germany, UK, Switzerland and Egypt - "Protection of civilians, international security, cessation of Turkish military operation in Syria"; Turkey - "Double standards of Western countries in combating terrorism especially in resolving the conflict in Syria"; and Peru - "Respect for democratic principles and the establishment of a democratic system in Peru" on the agenda of the Assembly, as a matter of urgency for discussion and adoption at this meeting.

The mentioned projects were put to a vote.

Along with others, the Azerbaijani delegation also took part in the vote and, as always, did not support the draft resolution against Turkey. As a result of the vote, the Indian proposal, having gained the required number of votes, was included in the agenda of the Assembly.

Azerbaijani Ambassador to Serbia Eldar Hasanov is also taking part in the Assembly.
