2019-10-19
https://www.independent.ie/sport/rugby/rugby-world-cup-2019/eyes-on-the-prize-38609894.html
Today, for the seventh time, Ireland have an opportunity to reach a Rugby World Cup semi-final. Never before have they made it beyond this point and, in what could be his final match in charge, Joe Schmidt and his team face their greatest challenge.

The three-in-a-row-chasing All Blacks stand between Ireland and their goal.

This is the fifth and final meeting between the sides during the Kiwi coach's tenure and the score stands at two-all. This one will go a long way towards defining his legacy.

For the players, it is an opportunity to go where none of their predecessors have gone before and shatter the quarter-final glass ceiling.

Despite their lack of success at this competition, Johnny Sexton says this Irish team is unburdened by history.

"Of course we'd like it to be better but it is what it is," the out-half said of Ireland's record at World Cups.

"There's nothing we can do about previous results now.

"All we can do now is concentrate on putting in our best performance tomorrow. That will give us a chance and if we can walk off that pitch tomorrow having played our best, given it everything, we can look at ourselves afterwards no matter what.

"That's what we focus on. The record at the tournament, it's not something that we've overly spoken about.

"Of course we know we can make history, we can create something a little bit special if we can do that.

"But I can't really speak about Ireland's record because it's been a different team every time."

Sexton was speaking at the Tokyo Stadium where he took part in a solo kicking session. The rest of the squad passed up the chance to train at the venue, with Joe Schmidt opting to remain close to the team's base across the city instead of making the three-hour round trip on a bus.

They welcomed comedian Risteárd Cooper to their lunch yesterday to help lighten the mood ahead of what Sexton has referred to as the biggest game of his career.

He admitted that this match has been on his mind for most of the year, if not longer, and he is relishing the challenge of taking on the 2011 and 2015 champions.

"It's been a long time in the back of our minds. It was always going to be a case of if we got through our pool we would be playing South Africa or New Zealand, that was the likelihood," he said.

"We are here now. It is a little bit surreal. I can't believe we are finally here. This time four years ago I was a supporter like you guys (due to injury). It is not a great place to be.

"I'm really looking forward to trying to show what we can do on the biggest stage, against the best team in the world. A team that hasn't lost a World Cup game since 2007, so it is going to be an enormous challenge. But it's one we are excited about, really eager about; we want to make the people at home really proud."

A lot of the focus in the build-up has been around Ireland's wins over New Zealand in 2016 and 2018, but assistant coach Ian Foster said the All Blacks have changed since those defeats.

"We have changed a lot of things in the last 12 months because we had to due to some performances last year that we're not proud of," Foster admitted.

"It's a different group we have got. They're excited, confident to play and our challenge around the big game is to make sure that we don't dampen that confidence.

"We have to be smart. We are playing a team that likes to suffocate you. We have to respect that, but at the same time we just have to make sure that we go out there and do what we want to do well."

If they progress, Ireland will meet the winner of today's England-Australia clash in Oita (8.15), while Wales take on France (8.15) in Oita tomorrow before South Africa meet hosts Japan in Tokyo (11.15).
