2019-10-19
https://thearabweekly.com/gender-equality-football-far-trivial-matter
Iranian women cheer during the World Cup Qatar 2022 Group C qualification football match between Iran and Cambodia at the Azadi stadium in Tehran, October 10. (AFP)

The issue of gender equality has loomed large in developments having to do with football in the Middle East and North Africa.

In recent days, Iranian clerics had to partially give up their diktat banning women from football stadiums based on self-declared decency rules that legitimise gender discrimination.

On October 10, Iranian women were allowed to watch and cheer their national squad as it defeated Cambodia in a FIFA qualifier.

The lifting of the ban, in place since 1981, was partial and applies only to international matches. Also, just 4,000 women -- surrounded by 150 female security personnel in black chadors -- were allowed in the stadium seating 80,000 spectators.

Iran had been, until this month, the last country not to allow women to enter football stadiums. The concession by Tehran's rulers was only possible after FIFA threatened to ban Iran's national team from world competition following the self-immolation by a young Iranian woman who was on trial for trying to enter a football stadium.

The struggle for Iranian women is not over, even if FIFA President Gianni Infantino sounded hopeful after Tehran's decision to allow women spectators in the football stadiums. "There can be no stopping or turning back now," Infantino said. "History teaches us that progress comes in stages and this is just the beginning of a journey."

The problem with Iran is that evolution from one stage to another can take a long time, if it occurs at all.

Amnesty International described the Iranian decision as "a cynical publicity stunt by the authorities intended to whitewash their image." It called on Tehran to "lift all restrictions on women attending football matches, including domestic league games, across the country."

Also in October, a Sudanese cleric in South Khartoum engaged in incitement against a female member of the government who supported young Sudanese female athletes to play football.

After a Sudanese women's football league began its first season on September 30, in the presence of the Minister of Sports Wala'a Essam al-Boushi, radical cleric Abdel-Hay Youssef drew crowds to the street in support of his claim that Islam forbids women from playing football.

Whether in Iran, Sudan or other parts of the region, the problem is not just about women's participation in football matches or attendance at sports events; it is about the dangerous consequences of the exploitation of religion to promote dubious social or political agendas and the need to accept gender equality as a prerequisite for progress.
