2019-10-18
http://www.koreatimes.co.kr/www/opinion/2019/10/197_277189.html
By Richard Pennington

Every Wednesday since 1992, a group of resolute people has gathered outside the Japanese Embassy in Seoul at noon to remember and honor the estimated 200,000 women -- mostly Korean -- who were forced into sexual slavery by the Japanese during World War II.

It's a sordid story that has been mishandled by the Japanese government from the first. They stonewalled, denied, rationalized and only confessed when courageous victims began to speak, and documentary evidence proved what had happened.

Pusillanimous apologies have been made in Japan's Diet and at the United Nations to the dwindling number of survivors, and in December 2015 Prime Minister Shinzo Abe and Korean President Park Geun-hye signed an agreement wherein Japan would create an $8.3 million fund for the benefit of surviving victims.

While I abhor Japan's cold-hearted refusal to fully own its crimes, I feel compelled to look at a related matter. In the destitute years after the Korean War, a network of prostitution developed in camp towns, known as gijichon.

Especially up near the Demilitarized Zone, you could find poor Korean women working in bars, brothels and massage parlors. Their clientele, if that term may be used, were mostly American soldiers.

The national governments of Syngman Rhee and Park Chung-hee, provincial governors, mayors, police, the military, gangsters, bogus job-placement agencies and other nefarious people all played a part in creating it. There were two goals: generating much-needed currency (25 percent of the country's GDP in the early 1960s) and keeping the Americans happy.

Some of the women went voluntarily, sure. Others were to some degree coerced or deceived. A young woman from the countryside, perhaps a village in Gangwon Province, whose family was desperately poor, would have a hard time saying no to an offer of a job, housing and adequate food.

The nature of that job, however, was often vague; sometimes outright lies were told. And once there, good luck getting out! In thrall to pimps, these women were subject to beatings if they did not "service" enough G.I.'s in a single day or if they tried to escape.

This went on up through the 1980s, and in fact there is still some of it today, although the women are more likely to be natives of the Philippines -- as if that makes it any less repugnant.

Some graves at Sangpaedong Cemetery in Dongducheon are marked and others are not. This cemetery is for many of the city's poorest. /Courtesy of Richard Pennington

In 2014 and again last weekend, I visited Sangpaedong Cemetery on the periphery of Camp Casey in Dongducheon, a few kilometers south of the DMZ. According to a dilapidated sign out front, it consists of 11,070 square meters, 1,050 people are buried there, and no further interments can occur as it is full.

Sangpaedong is the final resting place for many of the city's poorest. The graves are arranged haphazardly, dug in a hasty manner. I estimate that half have no markers of any kind. I saw mounds of various sizes and knew that in each case, a human being had been laid there without even the dignity of a coffin and covered with dirt.

A fair percentage of the decedents are women who had worked in the local sex trade. (The derogatory term for such women is yanggongju, or "Western princesses.") There was an unpleasant olfactory component to this cemetery; walking among the shallow graves, I smelled decomposing bodies.

I stayed for an hour both times, pondering the brief lives of these Korean ladies and how they had been, in effect, sacrificed for the sake of national security. I have been all over Korea, north, south, east and west, and the saddest place I have seen is Sangpaedong.

Last Saturday of September, I was able to interview the pastor of a church next door to the cemetery. He seemed strangely indifferent to the women in those burial mounds, insisting that all of them had chosen their line of work voluntarily. I asked whether, in his 16 years in the pulpit, he had ever given a sermon invoking compassion for the yanggongju. Never, he said.

The guilt of the Japanese during World War II is beyond doubt, at least in Korea. Sympathy for the "comfort women" is universal, so this second group of survivor-victims has started to speak out. They claim that the government helped institute and maintain the camp town sex trade. They were commodities used to shore up the country's struggling economy and to placate their ally, the United States.

By what logic are they less worthy than those whom the Japanese forced into sexual slavery? While it was on a smaller scale and less brutal, this more recent set of horrors also deserves to be brought into the light of day.

The Japanese were outsiders, foreigners, who compelled Korean women to work as prostitutes, but this was Koreans doing much the same to their own. Hypocrisy, pure and simple. It's hard to play the victim when you are also a victimizer.

Richard Pennington (raput76@gmail.com), a native of Texas in the U.S., works as an editor at a law firm in southern Seoul. He has written 21 nonfiction books, including "Travels of an American-Korean, 2008-2013." He is the director of an NGO, the Committee to Bring Jikji Back to Korea.
