2019-10-17
https://toofab.com/2019/10/17/jennifer-aniston-talks-breaking-instagram-telling-womens-stories-on-the-morning-show/
The "Friends" star also scored a Guinness World Record when she joined on Tuesday with a reunion selfie with her NBC co-stars, and has since posted an "apology" follow-up.

Jennifer Aniston has taken Instagram by storm, and she seems a little surprised about it herself.

The former "Friends" star literally broke the social media platform when she joined it on Tuesday with a reunion pic of her and her five co-stars from one of the world's most popular sitcoms. And even though she managed to crash her page, Aniston still got herself into the Guinness World Records by amassing 1 million followers faster than anyone ever.

And she beat out some pretty big competition to do it, scoring her millionth follower in 5 hours 16 minutes to beat out Prince Harry and Meghan Markle, who pulled off the feat in 5 hours 45 minutes earlier this year.

Aniston was all smiles about it during a visit to "Jimmy Kimmel Live" Wednesday night, where she tried to play it cool.

"You don't do that kind of stuff," Kimmel said about Aniston and social media.

"I don't know." It's an honest answer, at least. But it turns out she simply felt it was time to jump in with both feet. "What you resist persists," she said. She's even working on getting up on the lingo, telling Kimmel at one point later in the show that she's been banking content to keep her page lively.

After all, one pic may have broken Instagram, but it won't do to simply leave it there and never follow up. She's not an egg, after all.

Hilariously, she went on a bit of a rant, though, about people who leave comments that are simply emojis like hearts and thumbs up, wishing they'd actually write something more meaningful. It's probably a generational thing, but we'd recommend just leaving the comments be.

With 11.3 million followers, as of this writing, and growing, she's setting herself up to be inundated and overwhelmed if she hopes to keep up with all of them.

While taping "Kimmel," Aniston had yet to come up with her follow-up post, but she has since gone live with a reaction to breaking Instagram. Sharing a clip from her upcoming Apple TV+ series "The Morning Show," Aniston captured her character throwing down her phone by saying, "I swear I didn't mean to break it."

She and Kimmel spoke about her work on the show, where Aniston opened up about shadowing the team behind "Good Morning America" in preparation for the drama series. "It is a fascinating world. It's like this engine that revs up from 5 to 7 and it's just like something you've never seen."

And while the #MeToo hadn't yet reached critical mass, taking down the likes of morning show staples Charlie Rose and Matt Lauer, when she was first developing the series, it has since become a piece of story that cannot be ignored. "It's very timely," Aniston promised.

She also revealed that her experience at "GMA" was eye-opening as to how it hinted at life for the women who work there. "A lot of women were coming up and saying, 'You've gotta tell 'em this is what happens, and they don't let us do this,'" she said cryptically.

"A lot of people were just like, 'Please!'" she continued. "It's almost like they're in cages going, 'Get me out of here!'"

She promised Kimmel that some of the stories she got from Diane Sawyer will be incoporated into her charachter's experiences on the show, which has us hoping and wondering if any of these women's stories about this and this will make it, too. Perhaps this fictional exploration of morning show television will have more truth than many may realize.
