2019-10-17
https://www.thesun.ie/tvandshowbiz/4668046/marian-keyes-mental-health-national-archives-mercy-close/
IRISH author Marian Keyes has told how she's glad that Ireland is changing its attitudes to mental health.

The literary legend, 56, has been vocal about her struggles with depression in the past and told how she's glad to have helped get a conversation started around mental well-being.

In 2010, while writing her book The Mystery of Mercy Close, Marian found herself battling "crippling" depression and wrote a note to fans to tell them that she was "living in hell".

She told how she never imagined anyone would be interested in her admission, but is glad that it got people talking about the issue of mental health and well-being.

She said: "Honestly, I didn't mean for it to be such a big deal. I used to write a monthly newsletter.

"But it was a very sudden descent into the most horrific state of mind. I knew I couldn't write my newsletter because I was in such a state of extreme fear was how it mostly got me.

"I wrote a three line thing on my website saying 'I'm suffering from a bout of depression, I can't sleep and I can't eat and I'll be back with you soon'.

"It blew up, this huge thing. I'm obviously naive as I didn't think anyone would be bothered. The story was due to be on the six o'clock news. The idea it would be on the news seemed insane."

She told how she was raised to think that only people who are 'mental' suffer with mental health issues but is glad to see that stars like Bressie - aka Niall Breslin - are now championing the

issue.

She said: "There's no such thing as normal. I used to think a person was either normal or mental, that was how Ireland functions.

"It was like 'You better be normal, because if you're not normal, you're mental' - and no one wants to be mental. We're all on the spectrum and moving up and down.

"It depends on how we are, who loves us, it's fluid, it depends on so much: chemicals, circumstances, where we are in life, hormones. No one has any right to judge.

"Ask not for whom the bell tolls because one day it could be one of us going to the doctor asking for tablets saying 'I can't see any point in anything'.

"I'm extra delighted that there's been a focus on mental health for Irish men. I think Irish men are given an awful burden. The template of manhood that's presented to them is incredibly rigid.

"You have to be strong, you have to be the breadwinner, you have to be afraid of nothing, you have to have the fantastic job, you have to be better than your friends.

"It leaves men with no room to express any weakness.

"I love that Bressie is so open and a champion for men. Sexism affects us all and I think Irish men suffer as much as women from it."

Marian was speaking yesterday as the National Library of Ireland announced a pilot scheme to collect digital documents and collections.

Marian is the first donor involved, giving the NLI her digital documents relating to her 2012 book The Mystery of Mercy Close.

She said of her involvement in the initiative: "It was the National Library who came to me and I just thought it was a fantastic idea because I've never written with a pen and paper.

"I used to write at work in the accounts office where I worked. I used to write on the office computer 25 years ago when I started.

"It felt like such an honour to be asked as a woman. You would expect it to be a man and one of our really well-respected, well-awarded men.

"This book, in particular, I have so many versions of it because I had a bad bout of mental health that went on for a couple of years when I tried to write it. I had gaps for months where I didn't get anything done.

"It demonstrates that eventually projects can get finished even though it took much longer than usual - it took three years."

Earlier this year, Marian was honoured alongside rocker Bob Geldof by the University of Limerick for their activism.

Marian had also generously donated all of the royalties from her best-selling book 'Under The Duvet' to the Irish Simon Community.

Marian's first book Watermelon was published in Ireland in 1995 and was an instant hit. Since then she's sold more than 35 million books in 33 languages, making her one of Ireland's most successful novelists.

But she told how female writers still struggle to be recognised in the same way as male authors.

She said: "In our world, anything done by a woman is awarded less worth than something done by a man. That's a fact.

"This is not a bitter, feminist rant, it's the long and short of it. In this particular country, look at our Constitution - the woman's place is in the home.

"We know the paygap here is big, we know women still do about two thirds of the housework when both men and women work.

"Stories about women are afforded less value than the stories told about men. I really love football but it's treated as hard news in an actual newspaper, but things regarded as typically women's interest aren't."

Marian told how she hopes that by sharing her documents with the National Library, other budding authors will get an insight into the writing process and see what it takes to get a book to publication.

She said: "I think probably writers (will find the digital collection interesting). People who want to be novelists and don't know how to go about it or are trying and are baffled by how incredibly hard it is and don't have the opportunity to do a creative writing course.

"If they just see how incredibly nuts and bolts-y it is to write a novel, how long it is and how important it is to make mistakes and let them go."

Her next book, Grown Ups is due out in February and Marian told how she's continually striving to improve her work.

She said: "I think it's a good thing (to be self-critical). I want to write the best book I can write and I don't want to disappoint people.

"I love reading and I have favourite authors. But there's nothing more agonising than reading seven books you love and then the eighth, they've lost interest, they've got their yacht.

"I don't want to disappoint people in that way. I don't want to disappoint anyone - or myself."
