2019-10-16
http://thedailystatesman.com/index.php/politics/item/8395-ndc-has-nothing-to-offer-says-frema-osei-opare-rallying-npp-women
The national women's wing of the governing New Patriotic Party held its conference in Accra yesterday with a call on female NPP activists to go down into the trenches in the lead-up to the 2020 elections to sell the policies of the government, and publicise efforts being made by President Akufo-Addo and his team to transform the Ghanaian economy.

This, party executives believe, will ensure that the NPP flag continues to fly triumphantly even beyond the 2020 polls.

Speaking at the conference, the Chief of Staff, Akosua Frema Osei-Opare, challenged the women to work selflessly to ensure that the opposition National Democratic Congress (NDC) does not come back to power, saying the NDC has nothing good to offer Ghanaians.

The Chief of Staff said the NDC's only motive for returning to power is to turn back the clock on progress and inflict drudgery on ordinary, vulnerable Ghanaians.

"I have heard the opposition say when they come into power, the Free SHS initiative will be transformed. This is a blatant lie: the NDC will collapse the initiative," she said.

"The Free SHS idea was not carved in 2016. This has been a dream of the NPP since 2008, in the era of the erstwhile Kufuor administration," the Chief of Staff added.

The Chief of Staff, Akosua Frema Osei-Opare, addresses the women's conference

Mrs Osei-Opare recounted how the NDC, under former President John Mahama, cancelled key policies of the first NPP government, including allowances for trainee nurses and teachers. She noted that but for the timely intervention of President Nana Akufo-Addo, many nurses and teachers would still be roaming the streets, unemployed.

The Chief of Staff further encouraged members of the NPP, especially members of the women's wing, to get into the trenches and take an active part in broadcasting the success story of various social and economic interventions being made by the government.

She urged the women to take particular note of the entrepreneurial packages for women being rolled out by the Ministry of Business Development.

Also speaking at the event, the NPP national women's organiser, Kate Gyamfua, advised the women to remain loyal, firm and resolute in service to the party.

She urged them not to join those who are always "murmuring", but to keep faith with the Akufo-Addo government as it delivers and works to meet the expectations of all Ghanaians.

"When President Kufuor began rolling out the MASLOC [Microfinance and Small Loans Centre] scheme, we were impatient to understand that the process was in turns.

"Sadly, even people with money to run their businesses started making complaints and the NDC took advantage of it with their lies and took power from the NPP in 2008."

Ms Gyamfua therefore urged the women to unite and worker harder to retain the NPP in power in the 2020 elections and beyond.

In her contribution, the first national vice-chair of the party, Rita Asobayire, took the women through the NPP's organisationsal structures.

She advised the members, including all volunteers, to work with party executives and remain disciplined in all their dealings with the party.

"Our mandate now is to turn ourselves into Jehovah's Witnesses and win souls for the NPP," she charged.

The NPP national women's conference, an initiative of the office of the national women's organiser, aimed to unite, mobilise and empower NPP women to consolidate the gains the party made during the 2016 general election.

The theme of the conference was "Empowering Women for Election 2020 and Beyond".
