2019-10-17
https://entertainment.inquirer.net/348497/neri-naig-encourages-fellow-moms-and-women-to-help-each-other-out
Neri Naig has observed that many first-time moms are hesitant when it comes to asking for help, so she called on fellow moms and women to work together and help each other out.

"Napapansin ko kasi na maraming mga nanay, lalo na yung mga first time moms, ang nag-aalangang humingi ng tulong dahil natatakot silang mahusgahan ng ibang mga nanay," said Naig via Instagram on Oct. 16. "May iba kase na kung ano ang nakasanayan, yun lang ang tama para sa kanila."

(I noticed there are a lot of mothers, especially first-time moms, who are hesitant to ask for help because they are afraid to be judged by other mothers. It's because there are some mothers who think that what they are used to is the only thing that is right in their eyes.)

As per Naig, there are mothers who argue about a myriad of things, such as whether breastfeeding or formula is better for their children, of being stay-at-home moms or having a "yaya," whether a mom should have a business or a career and if they gained a lot of weight or regularly went to the gym during their pregnancy.

She also said in her video that a woman or mother gets branded as bad when they do things differently or not according to other people's beliefs.

"Parang pag may tinry ka or may ginawa ka sa bahay o sa buhay o sa mga anak mo na hindi angkop sa paniniwala nila, masamang ina ka na or isa ka nang masamang babae... Magtulungan tayo, yun yung naisip ko, parang women helping women, period."

(It's like when you try something at home or to your children that is not according to their beliefs, you are branded as a bad mother or a bad woman... Let's help each other, that's what I thought, like women helping women, period."

Naig also said in her post that it is difficult enough to be a mother and called on fellow moms and women not to make things harder for other moms.

"Mahirap ang maging isang ina. Wag na nating pahirapan pa mas lalo para sa iba... Hindi man parepareho ang mga nangyayare sa ating mga buhay pero sa pamamagitan ng pagshare ng ating mga experiences at journey, matutulungan natin ang isa't isa," she said. "Mas masarap magtulungan kaysa makipagbangayan."

(It's hard being a mother. Let's not make it harder for other moms... Although what we go through in life is not the same, we are able to help each other by sharing our experiences and journey. It is better to work together than fight).

The actress and "mompreneur" often shares advice to her followers about motherhood and business. Aside from bakeries, Neri runs a restaurant in Tagaytay and a cottage. She also has a rest house on the way, called Miranda's Rest House, which is her latest project with husband Chito Miranda, frontman of Parokya ni Edgar. /ra

Neri Naig calls out family who stole Easter eggs reserved for kids
