2019-10-15
https://www.forbes.com/sites/kimelsesser/2019/10/15/new-leanin-study-the-broken-rung-keeping-women-from-management/
According to new research by McKinsey and LeanIn.Org, the biggest obstacle to women's progress at work is not the glass ceiling keeping women from reaching the top levels of leadership. Instead, the researchers find that the biggest obstacle for women occurs at one of the very first steps on the corporate ladder -- the initial promotion to management. Men are far more likely than women to be promoted from their entry-level jobs to manager, and this early inequity also explains why they are a fewer women at senior levels of management -- women just can't ever catch up.

For their fifth annual report on women in the workplace, McKinsey and LeanIn.Org surveyed 329 companies, and questioned more than 68,500 employees. The study found that for every 100 men promoted or hired at the manager level, only 72 women were hired or promoted to manager. The gender difference is so great that the researchers claim that this "broken rung" at the first step up to manager is the biggest obstacle that women face on the path to leadership.

In fact, the "broken rung" at the bottom of the corporate ladder also keeps women from reaching the top of the ladder. Since fewer women are promoted to junior management, there are fewer women in the pipeline when it comes time to choose employees for senior management roles. As a result the number of women decreases at every subsequent management level.

Why are women overlooked for promotion? Sheryl Sandberg, LeanIn.Org founder and chief operating officer, and Rachel Thomas, LeanIn.Org president explained, "These are all workers at the entry level -- they haven't built long track records, they all have similar work experience, and they were all good enough to be hired in the first place. There's no good reason why so many more men than women are being tapped for promotions, only a bad one -- bias." Because of the "broken rung," men end up with 62% percent of manager jobs while women hold just 38%. There's no way women can catch up with men at senior levels of management, when they fall so far behind early on.

Women's struggle to make it to this first rung of the corporate ladder is not attributable to their pausing careers to take care of children. As in past years, this year's study found that women are not leaving their companies at higher rates than men. In fact, less than 2% of all employees are expecting to leave the company to care for family. It's also not related to gender differences in ambition, as the study found women ask for promotions at the same rate as men do. As Sandberg and Thomas state, it's all bias.

Previously, the "sticky floor" metaphor has been used to descirbe this phenomenon of women getting stuck at the lowest levels of the corporate hierarchy. Sticky floor research suggests that not only are women less likely to be promoted from entry-level jobs, but when they are promoted, they receive less pay than their male counterparts.

Fortunately, there are remedies for organizations committed to reducing this gender bias. The report highlights success stories at NextRoll, Nordstrom and Sodexo. After prioritizing gender diversity, NextRoll increased the number of women in senior management from 27 percent to 40 percent, Nordstrom increased the share of women in the C-suite from 7 percent to 40 percent, and Sodexo has increased the number of women by more than 20 percent at the SVP level. What's the secret to this success? The specifics at each company varied and included strategies like setting targets and keeping managers accountable. But all three organizations had one thing in common -- commitment to improving gender diversity.

Fortunately, businesses don't have to be motivated purely by the ethics and fairness of eliminating bias, there is also a compelling business imperative to eliminate the bias. Sandberg and Thomas write, "No business in the world can succeed without hiring and promoting good employees, and when the numbers are this lopsided, many talented women are being overlooked." Don't understand this argument? Imagine a society where only men were hired and promoted to management. A huge opportunity to attract top talent would exist for an organization which was open to hiring and promoting women. In fact this opportunity would continue to exist until equilibrium or, in this case, gender parity was reached. As long as men outnumber women in top management, there is superior untapped female talent out there for the taking. Hopefully, organizations will begin to recognize this opportunity.
