2019-10-18
https://inews.co.uk/sport/rugby-union/pep-guardiola-catalonia-protest-crisis-spain-eu-uk-intervene-manchester-city-manager-816763
Thanks, {{email}} has been added to our newsletter. If this is the first time you have subscribed to emails from JPIMedia Ltd, the publishers of inews, please check your inbox to verify your email address.

The former Barcelona manager made an emotive plea after nine Catalan officials and politicians were jailed for between nine and 13 years over their roles in Catalonia's failed bid for independence from Spain.

Guardiola has supported the activists throughout the two years they spent in Spanish jail without bail and this week described their punishment as a "direct affront to human rights."

As he prepared for City's meeting with Crystal Palace, with civil dissent growing in Barcelona, Guardiola called on outside bodies to intervene.

"I know exactly today what is going to happen in my country in Catalonia. How incredible that people from all around Catalonia go in to Barcelona to give support to the nine political prisoners and to social activists who are in jail for more than 100 years altogether," he said.

"So I think if the people were not convinced, millions of people would not work, (go) to the big city from Catalonia to give support to these people, the exiled people, who cannot go back home.

"So the statement I read from people in Catalonia - just sit and talk. I think the international community must help us to solve the conflict between Catalonia and Spain.

"The only thing is someone one millilitre outside to help us to sit in and talk, sit in and talk. Sometimes it is incredible to think about that but the situation happened last night and personal friends will be nine years in jail when what they ask is to try to vote.

"That's why it's not 10 people or 12, but millions of people today. Like it happened for the last years, specifically to go in there to give support to these people and their families and hopefully, Europe, make a step forward, Britain, and help us to resolve this conflict."

While Guardiola supported the peaceful protests in his home region, he has also offered to act as a mediator if a neutral body, such as the EU, can become involved in the process.

"Normally everyone looks at his own situations and when it no involves too much people look right, left," he said.

"We need it. We need Europe to solve this conflict. We need Europe. I think it's arriving, the time.

"People don't trust each other too much - Spain-Catalonia, Catalonia-Spain. That's why my statement was clear. It was just sit and talk, please. Sit and talk.

"So we have this ability as human beings. Animals cannot do that. We have the ability to sit and talk and try to solve it. I will read the manifesto, or whatever they asked me about defend the human rights, here, Alsasua (Basque) or in Madrid, about any issue or whatever.

"If they need me they can count on me, to defend the human rights and always be there. Here, in Arabic countries, wherever. We have to fight against racism, discrimination of gender, discrimination or equality between men's and women's. I will be there, all the time. No matter where and when."
