2019-10-18
https://www.timesnownews.com/entertainment/news/international-news/article/pic-inside-netizens-claim-jennifer-anistons-first-instagram-post-with-her-friends-has-drugs-on-the-table/505382
But fans believe that the table in the picture has lines of cocaine

You can always count on Jennifer Aniston to shatter the glass ceiling and bring the world to a standstill. While her acting prowess and fashion choices always have everyone's attention, this time around she literally set the internet ablaze when she joined Instagram. Yes, her page crashed and she's already clocked in over 13.4 million users on the social media handle. And she chose just the right picture to make her grand debut, a picture starring everyone's FRIENDS! A perfect selfie with Courteney Cox, Lisa Kudrow, Matthew Perry, Matt LeBlanc and David Schwimmer.

While we can't wait for Rachel Green to get a bit more active on social media, a few fans paid a little too much attention to this picture and now believe that this reunion involved drugs. If you zoom in closely, you'll find white patches kept on the mobile phones. Fans are now rest assured its cocaine and the trolling brigade has begun.

While fans continue to speculate, Jennifer received a warm welcome on the social media platform. Apart from dropping the 'friendlist' comments on her first post, fans and her co-stars have been showering Jen with love.

On the work front, Jen will be seen with Reese Witherspoon in The Morning Show and fans have eagerly been waiting for Rachel and Jill to come back together.

A few months ago, Karan Johar hosted the crème de la crème of Bollywood at his residence and the starry guest list included Deepika Padukone, Malaika Arora, Arjun Kapoor, Shahid Kapoor, Mira Rajput, Ranbir Kapoor, Vicky Kausahl, Varun Dhawan among others. Everyone at this party were accused of doing drugs as well and MLA Sirsa went on to ask the Mumbai Police to file an FIR against everyone at the party who were in a 'drugged state.'

While we wait to know more, stay tuned for all the updates on entertainment, fashion and lifestyle.
