2019-10-17
https://www.benzinga.com/pressreleases/19/10/b14616233/schneider-named-a-top-company-for-women-to-work-for-in-transportation
Women in Trucking Association honors company's commitment to female employment, advancement

In recognition of its dedication to employment practices and opportunities for females, Schneider (NYSE:SNDR), has been named a Top Company for Women to Work For in Transportation by the Women in Trucking Association (WIT). The honor is given annually by WIT's official magazine, "Redefining the Road," and celebrates companies that encourage the employment of women and minimize the obstacles they face in the trucking industry.

Over 150 companies were nominated and 11,000 votes cast to identify the companies named to this year's list, which is comprised of a range of business sectors in the commercial freight transportation industry. The honor distinguishes nominated companies on several criteria, including:

"We're committed to creating a company that promotes and celebrates inclusion and equality," said Erin Van Zeeland, Schneider's senior vice president and general manager of logistics services. "We're proud to receive the honor of being a Top Company for Women to Work For, and of all the talented and driven women at Schneider who exemplify what we stand for."

Schneider has a strong track record of promoting the employment and advancement of women. As a charter member of WIT, the company is a leader in providing opportunities to women in a traditionally male-dominated industry. In 2007, Schneider established the Schneider Women's Network with the goal of positioning the company to attract, develop and retain female talent. Through the Schneider Women's Network, associates gain opportunities to accelerate professional development and build relationships within the company, with customers and suppliers and in the greater community.

Schneider professional driver and training engineer, Kellylynn McLaughlin, was also recently named a finalist for WIT's Influential Woman in Trucking award. Over 100 women were nominated for the award, which recognizes the achievements of female role models and trailblazers in the trucking industry. Previously a child passenger safety expert for the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and SafeKids, McLaughlin has held a number of positions in the transportation industry. Now a professional driver stakeholder representative at the local, regional, national and international levels, McLaughlin mentors new Schneider drivers and is a strong advocate for women in trucking.

To learn more about Schneider's dedication to providing career opportunities to women, please visit https://schneiderjobs.com/truck-driving-jobs/women-in-trucking.

With $5 billion annual revenue, Schneider has been delivering superior customer experiences and safely getting it done for over 80 years.

For more information about Schneider, visit www.schneider.com or follow the company socially on LinkedIn and Twitter: @WeAreSchneider.

About Women in Trucking Association, Inc.

Women In Trucking Association, Inc. is a nonprofit association established to encourage the employment of women in the trucking industry, promote their accomplishments and minimize obstacles faced by women working in the trucking industry. Membership is not limited to women, as 17 percent of its members are men who support the mission. Women In Trucking is supported by its members and the generosity of Gold Level Partners: Arrow Truck Sales, BMO Transportation Finance, Daimler Trucks North America, Expediter Services, FedEx Freight, Great Dane, J.B. Hunt Transport, Michelin North America, Penske Transportation Solutions, Peterbilt Motors Company, Ryder System, and Walmart. Follow WIT on Twitter, Facebook, or LinkedIn. For more information, visit www.womenintrucking.org or call 888-464-9482.
