2019-10-18
https://bigleaguepolitics.com/social-justice-warriors-blame-toxic-fan-culture-for-audiences-rejecting-lgbt-tv-show-batwoman/
The ratings for CW's new feminist TV show Batwoman have already cratered in just its second week on the air.

The "woke" program lost about one-third of its initial audience from its premiere in its second episode that aired on Sunday night. The show posted a very low 0.3/1 rating with only 1.5 million viewers tuning in, as CW came in dead last of any major network in the ratings.

Social justice warriors are already blaming "toxic fan culture" for the immense unpopularity of the show. Commentator David Opie of Digital Spy pointed to user reviews on Rotten Tomatoes as evidence of trolls undermining the show's admirable messaging.

Trending: 84-Year Old Korean War and Police Veteran, School Crossing Guard Has Guns Confiscated Under 'Red Flag Law'

"Another show with so much potential ruined by wokeness," one review reads.

"You can tell a narrative is being pushed rather than a decent story being told," another review claims.

He also pointed to the unpopularity of Batwoman on IMDB as more evidence that trolls are waging war with the show. It receives a 3.1 rating on the site while only 12 percent of Rotten Tomatoes user reviewers give the show a "fresh" rating.

Instead of admitting that the show may be poorly written and unpopular based on its own merits, Opie blames a chauvinist glass ceiling of sexist internet trolls conspiring to hold this TV show down.

"While it's likely that the score for Batwoman will rise once the trolls move on and the reviews are once again made predominantly in good faith, it's grossly unfair that a show's reputation should be attacked like this before it's had the chance to grow into itself, particularly if these critiques are grounded in sexism and homophobia," Opie wrote.

"Batwoman is the first superhero show to star a lesbian character in the central role, but more will surely come in its wake, so it's vital that these shows are evaluated on their own merits, free of prejudice and bias," he added.

Batwoman is so heavy-handed with its agenda that it even hired far-left MSNBC propagandist Rachel Maddow for a role on the show, despite her lack of acting experience.

The actress playing the signature role is echoing misandristic, far-left talking points while plugging her series in media interviews.

"Some people will love the show, some people might be surprised and find that they really enjoy it, and some people might not see themselves on the screen and therefore not see the point. But there's obviously plenty of shows for people like that. There's plenty of shows for white old men," Batwoman star Ruby Rose said in response to the criticism about the show.

Although they can continue to make excuses about the show's lack of success, Batwoman will ultimately be the latest example of the axiom "get woke, go broke" and be cancelled if the ratings continue to sink.
