2019-10-18
https://www.annistonstar.com/sports/mlb/sports-column-les-winkeler-sign-of-times-jarnigan-s-quiet/article_e510e00c-6d8f-59ef-bd8b-3924787fe535.html
Streams of unconsciousness from the world of sports:

Liz Jarnigan: In today's political climate it sometimes feels like we're living in the Dark Ages, but occasionally something happens to remind us society is making progress.

It was nearly two days after Southern Illinois University athletic director Jerry Kill resigned before I realized that Liz Jarnigan, his replacement, was the first woman to hold the athletic director's title at SIU. Charlotte West had served as interim athletic director, bridging the gap between Jim Livengood and Jim Hart in 1987-88.

Thirty years ago this newspaper would have rushed to get stories on this breakthrough. It is still a noticeable accomplishment every time another glass ceiling is broken, but things are different than they were in the late 1980s.

Major League Baseball Sports Column | Les Winkeler: UMass win a building block?

Currently, almost 20 percent of Division I, II and III athletic programs have female athletic directors.

Jarnigan inherits a department that looks much different than it did when Kill assumed control 18 months ago. The women's soccer program has gotten off to a solid start. Six coaches in SIU's other 11 sports are Kill hires. Naming rights to the SIU Arena, now known as the Banterra Center, have been sold.

That's not to say Jarnigan can sit back and put the department on cruise control. There are still funding issues. Attendance at football and basketball remains troubling. And, Jarnigan said she would like to see a practice facility for men's and women's basketball.

But, one thing Jarnigan doesn't have to be concerned with is ridiculous speculation of whether a woman is capable of running an athletic department.

Major League Baseball Opinion | Jerry Kill's departure is good for Kill, but a big loss for Southern Illinois

Stolen bases: Don't look now, but the number of stolen bases in baseball is creeping up.

The stolen base fell out of favor for a decade or so because analytics indicated they were counterproductive. I'm not sure what's changed, but teams are running more.

The Cardinals recently stole their 100th base of the season. That seems like a lot, until you remember Rickey Henderson, Lou Brock, Vince Coleman and Maury Wills used to steal 100 bases a season themselves.

I'm not sure how many runs were generated by those steals, but movement on the basepaths certainly makes the game more entertaining. Speed puts pressure on the defense, and the action is more fun than waiting for a three-run homer.

For the record, the Cardinals are successful on 92 percent of their steal attempts. I'll take those odds.

Major League Baseball Sports Column | Les Winkeler: Twitter says "Boo" to NFL

Volleyball injuries: The Southern Illinois University volleyball squad won its sixth match earlier this week, equaling last year's win totals.

Ed Allen's crew is young, hungry and prone to errors. There are just two seniors listed on the roster.

But, recently, injuries have taken a serious toll.

Emma Baalman has missed time with back injuries. Alex Washington, a freshman of considerable talent, sat on the bench, her right foot in a boot, in Tuesday's win over Tennessee-Martin. And, Alex Wagner suffered a concussion Tuesday when struck by a deflected serve.

The team remains a work in progress. But, it will be interesting to see how much progress can be made if the team regains its health.
