2019-10-16
https://cwuobserver.com/13881/opinion/stem-lacks-women/
Women belong in STEM. I am an actuarial science major, which is broadly categorized as mathematics under a bachelor of science. That sounds odd simply because it is oddly simple.

One of the girls who I taught during the summer decided to give up on being a doctor because that's what her older brother was studying. I felt so angry for her, but she could not understand the frustration simply because those standards were normal to her. When young girls can't grasp the situations they are placed in when it comes to their education, I can't help but wonder why. No one should give up on the things that make them happy. It is heartbreaking to see younger females lose interest in the things they love.

Unfortunately, many young females feel discouragement towards entering STEM programs. The options for women in STEM do not hold much variety. As women, we should have the same options as men.

Barriers to leading a successful career in STEM can be overbearing and overwhelming. Expectations seem higher for women. In most cases, women seem to be losing their interest in STEM programs.

According to CWU, women in industry are changing the landscape with over 100 CWU student attendance.

Women can bring more to the table, if they are presented with opportunities. Women bring about more creative aspects to problem solving and critical inquiry. By having different experiences, women contribute different perspectives and solutions, some that men can not bring up. Women are progressing in law and medicine, imagine what could be accomplished if they could excel in the engineering fields. Greatness is achieved through empowerment, if women are empowered, everyone can benefit.

Although times feel more progressive, the gap between men and women in the working world is too wide. The cliche is that women are not as capable as men, that women slow down the process of work. The belief that women are emotional creatures, deeming them unfit for work in a man's world is absurd. Women not only can go into space, women can work on those aircrafts, or better yet, improve them.

However, for some reason, women still have barriers to becoming a part of STEM. Women are capable of breaking down barriers if they so choose. Of course programs are being made in order to add fuel to the fire in women, but there is still a gap.

Biases need to be kicked out the door. In order to battle the bias, people need to be aware of the bias. Pretending that the discrimination does not exist does not make the issue go away. The threat of stereotyping is real, but it has gone down as women have realized their potential in STEM fields.
