2019-10-16
http://www.thehollywoodnews.com/2019/10/16/theatre-review-9-to-5-the-musical-tour/
A fun humorous tale of women who are aspiring for workplace equality which unfortunately has not yet been achieved.

9 to 5 is a homage to Dolly Parton who wrote the music and lyrics to the show and starred in the original film. Dolly's presence is felt throughout as she introduces the characters and wraps it all up at the end. The show is set in the 1980s and is definitely of this period, not only in the attitudes but also the design of the set and costumes.

The story revolves around three women who work in an office and whose battle for respect and workplace rights is a routine occurrence and nothing out of the ordinary. Georgina Castle, who has the flair and voice to imbue the character of Doralee Rhodes with an authentic Dolly feel is very impressive. Laura Tyrer who portrays Violet Newstand, a woman who has worked hard and had trained up the man who was promoted above her. Amber Davis (Judy Bernly) is a new divorcee whose change in circumstances forces her to join the workplace. The three women all have very different characters but are bonded by the casual everyday sexism they face from their boss. Franklin Hart, who is played tongue in cheek by Sean Needham brings the feel of an adult pantomime as the boss; the humour he brings to the role is brilliant. Lucinda Lawrence is the glasses-wearing, hair up, uptight PA Roz Keith who reveals herself to be a lascivious, hair loose glasses-free corset wearing admirer of Franklin's, who unfortunately for her, has his eyes on Doralee.

The theme of sexism in the workplace should no longer be an issue in today's age, however, alongside recent media campaigns about the slowly narrowing gender pay gap, this production highlights that, unfortunately, it still very much is.

The scenery is impressive with the stage being lined by old computer monitors. The scene changes are slick and simple as the story moves from the homes, work and bosses' office. The office wear is a stylish throwback to the '80s as the colour and power dressing comes into play. This musical is a highly polished, foot-tapping, entertaining evening with several surprises. The whole auditorium was engaged with the show, with a standing ovation finale.

This is a brilliant evening's entertainment from start to finish. The skill and talent of the actors are very impressive and emotive, this is a brilliant treat of a show and one that is unmissable.
