2019-10-17
https://www.marketscreener.com//UNITED-STATES-STEEL-CORPO-14934/news/United-States-Steel-U-S-Steel-Inducted-into-the-Indiana-Manufacturers-Hall-of-Fame-29412651/
INDIANAPOLIS, October 16, 2019 - Today, United States Steel Corporation (NYSE: X) was inducted into the 2019 Indiana Manufacturers Association's (IMA) Hall of Fame at the Biltwell Event Center. The company was chosen by the organization for its the positive achievements and contributions to the industry, as well as an ongoing commitment to its 4,000 employees in the region and community.

'We are honored to be inducted into the Indiana Manufacturers Hall of Fame. We are proud to call Northwest Indiana home to our Gary Works facilities. We owe the honor to the thousands of men and women of U. S. Steel who work daily to uphold our core values of safety and environmental stewardship. These men and women work diligently and proudly to ensure our products are made with the utmost in safety, quality, delivery and cost,' said Dan Killeen, General Manager, Gary Works.

'The Indiana Manufacturers Association instituted the Indiana Manufacturers Hall of Fame Awards in 2016 to help bring awareness and recognition to the many positive contributions of Hoosier manufacturers,' said IMA President and CEO Brian Burton. 'We congratulate United States Steel Corporation for their outstanding work and continued dedication to making Indiana a manufacturing powerhouse.'

Indiana is the most manufacturing-intensive state in the nation, with the manufacturing industry being the number-one wage payer and employer of Hoosiers. Additionally, manufacturing continues to be the number-one job creator in Indiana, employing more than 545,000 in the state.

-oOo-

United States Steel Corporation, headquartered in Pittsburgh, Pa., is a leading integrated steel producer and Fortune 250 company with major operations in the United States and Central Europe. For more information about U. S. Steel, please visit www.ussteel.com.

About the Indiana Manufacturers Association

Formed in 1901, the Indiana Manufacturers Association is the second oldest manufacturers association in the country and the only trade association in Indiana that exclusively focuses on manufacturing. Manufacturing is the driving force of Indiana's economy, employing more people and contributing more to Indiana's gross domestic product than any other industry. The Indiana Manufacturers Association, representing more than 1,100 companies, is dedicated to advocating for a business climate that creates, protects, and promotes quality manufacturing jobs in Indiana. The staff of the Indiana Manufacturers Association are recognized experts in areas including tax, environment, labor relations, human resources, energy, workforce development, and health care. To learn more about how membership can be a be a benefit for your company, visit www.imaweb.com.

CONTACTS:

Media

Meghan Cox

Manager

Corporate Communications

T - (412) 433-6777

E - mmcox@uss.com

Attachments

Original document Permalink

Disclaimer

U.S. Steel - United States Steel Corporation published this content on 17 October 2019 and is solely responsible for the information contained therein. Distributed by Public, unedited and unaltered, on 17 October 2019 20:58:09 UTC
