2019-10-18
https://www.grimygoods.com/2019/10/18/vagabon-releases-video-for-new-track-every-woman/
Self-made, genre defying artist Vagabon shares a stunning, musical ode to anyone who's ever felt unseen in her latest music video, "Every Woman." Directed by Cameroonian filmmaker, Lino Asana, the video is reminiscent of Vagabon's early life in Cameroon, showcasing a humble, modest existence in a forest clearing. The one of a kind songbird also embarks on a full US tour this fall supporting Angel Olsen with a Los Angeles show date at the Palace Theater on Dec. 5.

A low humming acoustic guitar strums in Vagabon's story. Thematically in the vein of storytelling folk songs, her voice sounds personal and wise, with ambient sounds droning in the background. Even after the song is finished, it swirls in your head, sparking pensive inspiration and courage.

"We're not afraid of the war we brought on, and we're steady while we're holding you all" - "Every Woman," Vagabon

Moniker of Lætitia Tamko, Vagabon calls "Every Woman" the thesis of her sophomore album, representing transparency and strength. "'Women' in this case isn't gendered, it's a placeholder for those who are not always welcome and not always protected. This song exists for all of us to see each other and find each other," Tamko says. "The song is also a thank-you letter to the women who raised me, the women who look like me, the women who work in all of the genres of music that guided this album, 'the women who run with the wolves.'"

Tamko's album, titled 'Vagabon,' is a new wave for the artist. Fresh off her debut, she skyrocketed herself into musical discovery and leaned into experimentation. "I wanted to be curious and I wanted to make big leaps as a producer. All I had access to on the road was my computer and Logic, so naturally I started writing songs electronically with what was at hand." The West African guitars and rhythms that soundtracked much of her childhood seep into this album as well, showing us an artist who has truly stepped into her own.
