2019-10-18
https://politi.co/35Nn0tl
POLITICO national security and space reporter Jacqueline Feldscher headed over to NASA headquarters in Washington on Friday morning to watch the first ever all-female spacewalk. Here's her report from the event:

"Packed into a dimly-lit operations center illuminated by a wall of TV screens alongside top NASA officials, members of Congress and reporters, we saw history happen 220 miles above earth when two women emerged from the International Space Station at 7:38 a.m. The two female astronauts slowly exited the space station's hatch and, tethered to the orbiting habitat in two places for safety, climbed carefully along the outside of the station to fix a lithium ion battery charging unit.

"The live video feed was at times remarkably clear, coming from both external cameras and cameras attached to the astronauts' helmets, but the feed got grainy when night came on the space station -- something that happens 16 times a day as it orbits the Earth at 17,000 miles per hour."

BY THE NUMBERS: "About one-third of the active astronaut corps is women -- 12 out of 28. Koch and Meir were both selected to be astronauts in 2013, the first astronaut class to be 50 percent women. 'We're moving forward every day to be more inclusive in our missions,' NASA Administrator Jim Bridenstine told reporters gathered at NASA HQ this morning."

THE CHALLENGES: "NASA's previously attempted all-female spacewalk, in March, was scrapped because there weren't enough usable spacesuits onboard the International Space Station that could fit the two women. Kenneth Bowersox, the acting leader of NASA's human exploration program, acknowledged that NASA has focused on building spacesuits designed for men, since the astronaut corps has been predominantly male, but that is changing. 'In the future we want to make sure we expand the capability for smaller people -- not just women, but smaller men too -- to be able to function in the suit, so we're spending money on that.'" See a photo Jacqueline took here

-- "NASA's New Space Suits Will Fit Men and Women Alike (for Once)," via Wired

Happy Friday and welcome to Women Rule. This week, the Nobel Prize in Economics was awarded to MIT's Abhijit Banerjee and Esther Duflo, and Harvard's Michael Kremer for their work on poverty. Duflo, 46, is the youngest person ever to win the prize and only the second woman.

Thanks to Maya Parthasarathy, who brings you the What Rulers Are Reading section this week. Subscribe here.

ABOUT THE PHOTO OF THE WEEK -- A photo of House speaker Nancy Pelosi, standing up, finger pointing at President Donald Trump in a room full of seated men traveled at light-speed over the internet this week. The photo was taken on Wednesday during a White House meeting to discuss Syria policy attended by a bipartisan delegation of House members and senators, as well as military leaders.

Trump thought he'd get the better of Pelosi by tweeting the image with the caption "Nervous Nancy's unhinged meltdown!" But Pelosi immediately made it her Twitter cover photo, touting it as a signal of her strength in the very male-dominated world of U.S. politics. (There is just one other woman in the photo.) Pelosi said about the photo, "At that moment, I was probably saying, 'All roads lead to Putin.'"

Let's remember: Trump has assembled the most male administration in decades, appointing twice as many men as women to administration positions.

2020 WATCH -- "The transformation of Elizabeth Warren: She faced sexism, split with a husband and found her voice teaching law in Houston" by Holly Bailey: "She had been asked to eulogize longtime UH law professor Eugene Smith, who, as head of the faculty hiring committee in 1978, had been an early Warren champion, urging colleagues to look past her limited teaching experience and what some perceived as her second-rate Rutgers Law School degree.

"Smith, who died of complications from the polio he contracted as a child, had specifically requested that Warren speak at his funeral. But what she said inside a small campus chapel stunned her former colleagues.

"With a smile on her face and humor in her voice, Warren described how Smith had invited her to his office one day just a few months after she had been hired. He shut the door and lunged for her, she said, and as she protested, he chased her around his desk before she was able to escape out the door.

"'Everyone was slack-jawed,' recalled John Mixon, a retired UH professor who had been close friends with Smith and Warren. Among those listening: Smith's ex-wife and his three adult sons." WaPo

-- A new study by Avalanche finds that Democratic voters, despite widespread perceptions that a woman will have a harder time beating Trump than a man, now see Warren as electable as Biden.

-- OTHER DEBATE NEWS: "Klobuchar raised $1.1M for presidential campaign post-debate": "The moderate Democratic Minnesota senator was among the top critics of Massachusetts Sen. Elizabeth Warren on Tuesday, criticizing Warren's health care plan as a 'pipe dream.' She also ripped President Donald Trump. Campaign manager Justin Buoen said late Wednesday the campaign had its best day of online fundraising, surpassing the day she launched her bid in February." AP

-- "Kamala Harris Calls for Attention on Reproductive Rights at Debate" by Heather Murphy: "'Women have been given the responsibility to perpetuate the human species,' [Harris] said. 'Our bodies were created to do that, and it does not give any other person the right to tell a woman what to do with that body. It is her body. It is her right. It is her decision.'" NYT

-- ON THE TRAIL: Speaking in Washington on Thursday to the DNC Women's Leadership Forum, an organization dedicated to recruiting and engaging women in Democratic politics, Joe Biden talked about everything from the "remarkable" women he campaigned for in 2018 to the importance of reauthorizing the Violence Against Women Act, which he sponsored in 1994. "One of the things that you've helped change in this room is we no longer talk about 'women's issues,'" he told the crowd. "The fact is it's a ridiculous phrase. Every single issue is a women's issue -- the economy, guns, health care, national security."

The speech eventually turned to Trump: "Donald Trump not only is a president who has belittled women and degraded them his whole life, he's ... striking at the heart of our democracy. Trump's entire life is built on the abuse of power, which is what violence against women is all about," Biden said. "But like every bully I've ever known as a stuttering kid, they're all afraid. He is definitely afraid. He's afraid, and he should be because of the women in this room. You all know what's at stake, and you're going to go out and you're going to beat him like a drum."

-- DOWN BALLOT: Valerie Plame, the famed former George W. Bush-era CIA operative who is running for Congress in New Mexico, raised $446,749 in the third quarter. POLITICO Playbook calls it "a healthy haul for a non-incumbent in an off year." Check out her spy-themed campaign ad

METOO LATEST -- "MeToo leader launches new hashtag to mobilize voters" by Errin Haines: "The new hashtag #MeTooVoter was unveiled Tuesday, on the same day as the fourth Democratic presidential debate and reflects a frustration among activists that issues of sexual violence and harassment have largely been absent from the debate stage and campaign trail. ...

"[#MeToo founder Tarana] Burke said that nearly a year into the Democratic primary, none of the 2020 hopefuls has spoken to her as they have shaped their presidential platforms, which she said points to a lack of urgency even amid a climate of increased awareness around the issue. She hopes #MeTooVoter will prompt debate moderators to ask a question about sexual violence at the next debate." AP

WOMEN ARE GOOD FOR BUSINESS -- At the Institute of International Finance (IIF) Annual Membership Meeting in Washington this week, S&P Global released extensive new research on the performance of female CEOs and CFOs. Highlights:

COVER GIRLS -- National Geographic's November issue, "Women: A Century of Change," is its first-ever written and photographed exclusively by women. With this issue, National Geographic says it will kick off a year of coverage across print, digital and broadcast platforms exploring the lives of women and the massive changes underway for girls and women around the globe. National Geographic

ARE YOU DELEGATING? -- "Women Are Less Likely to Delegate Than Men -- and That Might Hurt Their Careers" by Michelle Ma: "The key to workplace success might instead lie not in doing the work, but rather in passing much of it on to others. And new research suggests that women are at a big disadvantage on that front.

"That's the main takeaway from a quintet of Columbia Business School studies that examine differences in the way men and women delegate. Led by Modupe Akinola, an associate professor of management at the business school, researchers found that women are less likely to delegate than men, are more likely to feel guilty about doing so and tend to have less-courteous interactions with subordinates when they do pass on tasks.

"The problem then is that women who don't delegate have little time for big-picture work, and miss opportunities to train and mentor their subordinates, the Columbia researchers found." WSJ

'THE LEADERSHIP FUNNEL' -- "A Lot of Women Work in Health Care. But Not at the Top. Why Is That?" by Lauren Weber: "The leadership funnel starts contracting in the very first step to manager and gets ever narrower. McKinsey's data for entry-level personnel includes front-line employees such as nurses and home health aides, as well as recently graduated physicians. The biggest drop for women in leadership occurs at the senior manager/director level. Women of color fare worse than white women, starting out at 23% of the entry-level workforce and rising to just 6% of C-suite roles. For white women, representation shrinks from 52% at the bottom of the ladder to 29% at the top." WSJ

AROUND THE WORLD -- "The best and worst countries to be a woman," by Eve Conant: "'This exercise of rating and ranking can be really powerful because countries, like human beings, think in relative terms and compare themselves with others,' says Judith Kelley, author of Scorecard Diplomacy and Dean of the Sanford School of Public Policy at Duke University. ...

"No matter where a country ranks on the list, there are surprises. 'A pattern of unevenness categorizes pretty much all countries,' says Jeni Klugman, managing director of the Georgetown Institute and lead author of the index. 'For example, Afghanistan does relatively well in terms of [women's] political participation.' And Yemen, the lowest on the list, has relatively low levels of intimate partner violence and even son bias, the prenatal sex determination and abortions that can result in more boys than girls born in a country." The ranking

-- "Opinion: In the Land of Voiceless Women," NYT ... "The teenager married too many times to count," BBC ... "Opinion: In Sudan, Women Showed the World How It's Done," NYT

GRAPHIC -- "What 'Women's Work' Looks Like Now," by Elliot Bentley and Soo Oh: "As occupations gain in prestige and pay, they often lose women over time. Computer-programming and cooking for a living were seen as unglamorous clerical and kitchen work. But with the rise of the personal computer in the 1980s and the dot-com boom of the 1990s, computing began to be seen as more complex, elevated work, and the prototypical 'computer girl' became a 'computer geek.' A similar phenomenon happened as restaurant kitchens became more high-end and corporate. Separately, economic data show that post-recession, a disproportionate number of manufacturing jobs created in the recovery have gone to men." Check out the cool graphic: WSJ

MAKING MONEY MOVES -- "Drawn by the Salary, Women Flock to Trucking," via WSJ

NEWS YOU CAN USE -- "If Women Don't Apply to Your Company, This Is Probably Why," by Lori Mackenzie, Alison Wynn and Shelley Correll: "In a recent study, we had researchers attend 84 information sessions held by technology companies at a West Coast college; they took notes about the presentations, the mix of presenters, and the language and images used. To measure attendees' engagement, we noted positive responses when attendees actively participated and asked questions, and negative ones when they remained silent or even walked out of the room. ...

"When you isolate these data points, it's easy to see why women seemed less than enthusiastic about these presentations and the companies behind them. After all, if the experts leading the sessions are mostly male or if the imagery in their presentations are mostly of men or don't present women professionally -- what are the chances that women are viewed as being equally capable as men at that company? If the 'fun' culture being promoted or bragged about is one in which women may be less likely to be able to participate, what are the chances that women are seen as 'fitting in' the company? These presentations sent signals that the companies -- their workplaces and cultures -- were male-advantaging. And women, consciously or not, picked up on them." Harvard Business Review

-- "How Salesforce Closed the Pay Gap Between Men and Women," via Wired

A NEW SUBWAY MAP -- "'City Of Women' Subway Map Gets A 2019 Update," by Shumita Basu: "You can easily spend a day in New York City only interacting with public spaces named after male figures. (Did you know that Bleecker Street is named after the writer Anthony Bleecker?) And perhaps it's the ease of that subtle, underlying assumption we carry with us as we move around the city that makes the 'City of Women 2.0' map so effective in its simplicity.

"This re-imagined subway map (originally created by Rebecca Solnit and Joshua Jelly-Schapiro in 2016 and recently updated for 2019) is identical to the MTA's current map, with one exception: every station is named after a notable woman with a New York connection. Newly-added names include Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, Cardi B, the All-Girl Robotics Team in the Bronx, and the poet Jacqueline Woodson." Gothamist

LETTER FROM HOLLYWOOD -- "'Bombshell' trailer shows women of Fox News preparing for a fight," via CNN

HISTORY DEPT. -- "The Glamorous, Sexist History of the Women's Restroom Lounge" by Elizabeth Yuko: "It was rooted in the idea of separate spheres: that women's place was in the home and men's was outside, in public. So when middle-class women did venture into public for extended periods -- when they went to the theater, for example -- it was thought that they required a private, safe, gender-segregated space of their own that looked and functioned like part of their home. 'They were designed like living rooms -- like parlors -- as spaces to protect virtue,' [design historian Alessandra] Wood said." City Lab

-- "At 13, She Broke the Women's Marathon World Record. Then She Disappeared From Running," by Kit Fox and Rachel Swaby: "On May 6, 1967, Maureen Wilton, a 13-year-old girl from a suburb of Toronto, Canada, attempted to break the women's marathon world record of 3:19 at a small race a few miles from her home. Under the guidance of her track coach, Sy Mah, she had already become one of Canada's best female distance runners in races up to five miles -- the farthest distance race organizers would allow women to run. Seeing Wilton's potential to break barriers in the marathon, Mah battled the Canadian Amateur Athletic Union to allow her to race 26.2 miles. ...

"When Maureen came through the starting area for the fourth lap, her teammates hopped onto the street and ran with her to keep her company. They passed four more men over the next five miles. Coming into the final lap, Maureen had moved up to eighth place. Somewhere behind her, the men who were allowed to run this race because of their strong bodies and masculine minds hobbled forward. The girl who wasn't supposed to be able to do this smiled to her friends and waved. She only had one five-mile lap to go." Excerpt from "Mighty Moe: The True Story Of a 13-Year-Old Women's Revolutionary" via Runner's World

WE LAUGHED -- "Origin Stories of Tech Companies if Their Founders Had Been Women," by Ginny Hogan: "Facebook: Zuckerberg (she wanted to be known as 'Zuck,' but it sounded too much like 'suck,' which launched a thousand bad blow-job jokes) attempted to create an app that would allow her to rank boys at Harvard. She wanted to rank them on their integrity, honesty, and kindness, so there was no market for it. Unable to get funding, she gave up and took a programming job at Google instead. She was the best programmer in her class, but, still, rumor has it that she got the job because they needed more women." The New Yorker

TRANSITIONS -- U.S. Postmaster General Megan Brennan plans to retire in January. Brennan, a former letter carrier, was the first woman to have the job. ... Subhan Cheema is now communications director and adviser for Rep. Pramila Jayapal (D-Wash.). She was previously deputy communications director for Sen. Richard Blumenthal (D-Conn.). ...

-- Joy Ditto will take over as head of the American Public Power Association in January. ... Andrea O'Neal has joined the National Geographic Society as communications and marketing manager.

WISDOM OF THE WEEK -- Carol Sankar, founder of CSE and The Confidence Factor for Women: "The best lesson I've learned in my professional career is the difference between assuming vs. asking. For the first decade of my career, I kept my head down, volunteered and worked hard, while assuming someone would find me and honor my value. I later learned that I had to pick my head up and ask for what I am worthwhile advocating for my own value based on my unique value in the market. It was the best discovery I have ever made." Connect with Carol here.

IMPACT PARTNER CONTENT -- Seeking out a mentor can be an intimidating endeavor for anyone, but there are resources available to make it easier for young women to connect with mentors who are enthusiastic about women's political leadership. Young alumni of the Running Start program tell how mentors have contributed to their success so far and give advice to peers who may feel daunted to connect with would-be mentors. Learn more about Running Start here.

MARKETPLACE -- Each month, we highlight a female founder by sharing her company's story. This October, we're featuring Tory Burch fellow Sabena Suri, co-founder and chief strategy officer at BOXFOX, a gifting company creating stronger relationships through personal gifts, powered by simple user experiences.

"Be OK with both hearing and saying no. When you're first starting out, you will hear a lot of noes, probably more than yesses, but you still have to charge forward. But you've also got to get comfortable saying no. When you're small and trying to establish yourself, it can be tempting to bend over backwards for every opportunity that comes your way, but you should have a lens by which you identify what opportunities are right for you, whether that be your values, your mission or your revenue goals. It all comes down to conviction and clarity." Use code WOMENRULE15 for 15 percent off your BOXFOX purchase.

Women Rule is produced by POLITICO in partnership with our founding partners, Google and the Tory Burch Foundation. To learn more visit Women Rule and #RuleWithUs on social.
