2019-10-18
https://www.nottinghampost.com/news/health/west-bridgford-mum-menopause-taboo-3444838
"I always thought I would know when I would be going through it, but I felt like there was something else underneath all of this affecting my health."

Get the biggest Daily stories by emailSubscribe We will use your email address only for the purpose of sending you newsletters. Please see ourPrivacy Noticefor details of your data protection rightsThank you for subscribingWe have more newslettersShow meSee our privacy noticeCould not subscribe, try again laterInvalid Email

A mother from West Bridgford has shared her experience of going through menopause in attempt to break the "taboo" surrounding it and to raise awareness of the "huge impact" it can have on mental health.

Ceri Feltbower, who is 49 and associate director of improvement at Sherwood Forest Hospitals, hopes sharing her experience will "help other women piece the jigsaw together" and better understand symptoms of menopause.

She has decided to raise awareness as some women struggle to identify mental symptoms of menopause and so it can be discussed more openly among colleagues and friends.

Nottinghamshire Live spoke to Ceri as part of World Menopause Day (October 18) to find out about her experience and also how the taboo of menopause can be broken.

Ceri said: "It's not a subject you hear people openly discuss and sharing their stories around it which makes it very difficult.

"Most women do not want to be treated differently but people need to understand that we are often not at our best during menopause.

"I didn't have hot flushes or cycle changes as symptoms. I would wake up in the middle of the night with a huge sense of dread and anxiety, and also would get severe pins and needles."

Speaking at a menopause conference at Kings Mill Hospital, Sutton-in-Ashfield, Ceri added that not many women are aware that menopause has a "huge impact on your mind" and at times she has felt as if she was watching herself but unable to understand why she was acting differently.

Ceri said attending the conference last year helped her connect her symptoms to menopause.

She said: "I always thought I would know when I would be going through it, but I felt like there was something else underneath all of this affecting my health.

"It's difficult as a working woman going through the menopause because you are having to make adjustments and trying to understand what's happening to you physically and mentally."

Menopause usually affects women in the UK between the ages of 45 and 55 and is a natural part of ageing where a woman's periods become less frequent or stop.

Common symptoms include hot flushes, night sweats, difficulty sleeping and anxiety.

The conference - which was launched last year - on October 18 was for Sherwood Forest Hospitals Trust staff as four out of 10 women who work at King's Mill Hospital, Mansfield Community Hospital and Newark Hospital are over the age of 50 and likely to experience menopausal symptoms at work.

Last year, the Trust became one of the first in the country to give out a menopause guidance document.

Suzanne Banks, chief nurse at Sherwood Forest Hospitals, hosted the conference and also shared her experience of dealing with menopause.

The 54-year-old said: "In recent years, I have been going through symptoms of menopause and I was aware that I was forgetting things. I would be asked several questions and always forget the last one, for example, but I would be lighthearted about the whole thing.

"I would talk about it openly with my colleagues and some senior nurses would say things to me like 'I'm not at the top of my game anymore' but that was only their perception as they were going through the menopause.

"I got periods of being very anxious about things I'm not normally anxious about. But I knew at the time that it was menopause because of how I had been having hot flushes too.

"Me and a group of others who work at trust made the decision to put some guidelines together about the whole thing. We wanted to promote menopause, educate menopause, and remove the taboo of menopause with guidance from HR."

Ceri added: "It's something that every woman in the world will go through so the more you talk about it, the less of a secret or taboo it becomes."
