2019-10-19
https://www.stuff.co.nz/life-style/parenting/116508426/what-jacinda-and-clarke-teach-us-about-gender-roles
Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern sat down with Stuff's Alison Mau after the birth of baby Neve.

It would be lovely if being a stay-at-home dad did not make global news headlines, but having a man as the primary caregiver is still apparently almost as unusual as having a pregnant prime minister. As a media personality, Clarke Gayford has always been a bit of a dude - he's the lead presenter on a show called Fish of the Day, for goodness' sake. Man knows how to fish. Having him crop up in photographs pushing Neve in a pram at Premier House while Ardern is about to give a speech or dangling a UN accreditation to distract Neve while at the United Nations, and seeing him post missives on Twitter like:

"Having been swamped with parenting advice I'm wary of oversharing, except to offer 2 things: 1. Quality time together really is the best. 2. When washed together, the velcro on your child's bibs will ruin your favourite lace underwear" and "Does anyone know if there is a pro league in NZ for competitive bath splashing? (Asking for a one year old)" has got to be nudging at gender-role expectations.

Even as a feminist, I never really realised how deeply ingrained our ideas around gender roles are - or how attached we are to them - before having a child of my own. We didn't find out the sex of our baby, and this seemed to really throw people off. The thought that you would design a nursery or stock up drawers with baby clothes without knowing what colour to buy really threw a spanner in the works for helpful salespeople, wellmeaning strangers and family members alike. (Because everyone knows girls pop out of the womb dying to wear pink and play with dolls, just as boys have an in-built love of trucks and the colour blue.)

To be quite frank, there's no guarantee the baby is even the gender you are assuming it is yet - given that, as we know, sex and gender are not the same thing - and the fact we are trying to shove children into nice little binary boxes even before they are born just shows how rigid these constructs are.

There is a sensation of barely suppressed rage I feel when people mistake my longhaired boy for a girl, or ask if I want them to go and get the same red shoe he's trying on in blue ("I think we've got some out the back. He'd prefer that, wouldn't he?"), or when they suggest he doesn't like colouring in because it's "more of a girl thing", or when they suggest he's going to be a "heartbreaker" when he grows up. This is not because I necessarily care if people think he's a girl or that he should wear different shoes. It's because they're anticipating how he'll act and what he'll desire just by looking at him. I watch how people react to my son, and how they react to my niece who's the same age.

The world already treats them differently. The stereotypical and outdated ideas about masculinity that we foster in our boys and men - being strong, stoic, providing, possessing - have repercussions. New Zealand has no shortage of this macho hyper-male culture. It's in our rugby clubrooms. It's at the cricket nets. It's at barbecues, on boys' nights outs, on internet forums, in the comments sections of news websites.

This is the kind of masculinity that gives men a sense of entitlement and ownership over women's bodies and renders it a sign of weakness for men to talk about feelings. It's what fuels our country's appallingly high rates of male suicide and our equally dismal domestic and sexual violence statistics. It's important that little boys see there are other acceptable and encouraged ways of being a man - nurturing, loving, kind and gentle.

This is partly why labelling feminists as manhaters is absolute nonsense. A world where people of all genders are truly free to express themselves as they choose is one that's better for everyone. Because, make no mistake, the version of masculinity that is currently prized in this country can be extremely destructive.

When a man is suffering from mental health problems, it's what tells him to "suck it up". When a man wants to arrange flowers and host his friends for dinner, it's what tells him he's a "pussy". The suicide rate in New Zealand is a national travesty, and it's boys and men who are suffering the most. Of the 685 people who took their own lives in the year to June 2019 - the highest figure on record - 68 per cent were men. Some of the highest rates were among young men aged between 15 and 24, and among Māori. The causes of suicide are obviously complex, but the pressure on men to "man up" has to be taken into account.

One of my former colleagues, journalist and writer Matt Calman, used to be the police reporter at The Dominion Post. This is one of the most coveted roles in a newsroom, extremely high pressure. His partner is a successful lawyer. When he decided to quit his job in late 2010 to stay at home with their first baby when she was 9 months old, it seemed unusual to us, his colleagues. In our early 20s, we were forging our careers, and it seemed like he was making a big sacrifice - why wasn't his wife staying at home? When I'd meet him for coffee back then, he'd often say how isolating it was being the lone father in any of the parenting groups he attended.

"All the blokes were working. I was the only dad. At the beginning, [the mums] did edit the conversations around me a bit, but then one day they just said, 'We're not going to edit the conversation any more.' It went the other way too, because when I got my vasectomy they wanted to ask all these questions about it, then talk to their husbands about how pain-free it was."

At the time, his situation was so unique that he even wrote a blog about it - ironically, for former Fairfax Media "parenting" website Essential Mums.

Calman told me the decision to become primary caregiver was fairly easy.

"I'm actually a pretty domestic person - I like doing housework, I've got more patience when it comes to dealing with a small child. I just seemed to have more of an aptitude for it. My wife was more career focused, and her job was the better-paid one in terms of the financial stability of the family. I've always felt that there's no 'women's work' or 'men's work' in all walks of life. I've never felt it wasn't normal."

While there was the odd negative comment, he got a lot of support from other men. "A lot said, 'Oh, I wish I could do that,' or, 'Man, I would have loved to have been at home with my kids.'"

Still, sometimes he has wondered what other men think of him not being the breadwinner, given the traditional expectation placed on men to provide. "You think these expectations are on you but they're not. It's the expectations you place on yourself. They're false expectations, but they are powerful and they can be oppressive. But then I think women feel the pressure to be perfect mothers and nurturers, and that's not always their best role. The one who stays at home is not always the best suited to it."

Calman, whose daughters are now 6 and 9, is still their primary caregiver. His partner is now a partner at a prestigious law firm. "Her career is going really, really well, and there's no resentment. You can get sucked into the idea that men and women parent differently, but I think it has more to do with personality than gender."

Gayford is setting a fantastic example, according to Calman. This is despite Gayford's stint as a full-time stay-at-home dad being relatively brief, with the presenter announcing in October 2018 - when Neve was 4 months old - that he would resume filming on Fish of the Day that summer. (Asked about this later, Ardern said Gayford's job was intermittent and that her mum and mother-in-law would be helping her when he was away filming.)

"It's definitely going to have an impact on the next generation, who are living in this time," Calman told me. "It's fantastic he's jumped into it, and that they have gone ahead with their plans of having a family and not seen it as a choice between Jacinda being the prime minister or having a baby. She's leading by example, and showing the rest of New Zealand and the world: 'You get on board or you get left behind.'"

What does "having it all" even mean?

This phrase has got to be one of the most aggravating cultural artefacts of the 1980s, worse even than mullets or slouch socks. It sounds like a trashy magazine slogan or something the Cat in the Hat would promise as he busted into your house, balancing your baby, a laptop, a gym towel, some high heels and a romantic dinner for two while busting some annoyingly lengthy rhymes and terrorising nearby pets. A New York Times article entitled "The complicated origins of 'Having It All'" traced it to Helen Gurley Brown's 1982 book Having It All: Love, success, sex, money... even if you're starting with nothing. Gurley Brown had been the editor of Cosmopolitan for two decades when the book came out. She also didn't have any kids. I'm not sure about a cat.

In many interviews about motherhood, Ardern has noted her position of privilege and how much help she gets. "I have the ability to take my child to work - there's not many places you can do that. I am not the gold standard for bringing up a child in this current environment, because there are things about my circumstances that are not the same," Ardern told a Unicef summit on her first visit to New York with Neve in September 2018. She added that she hoped it will be normal, one day. "If I can do one thing, and that is change the way we think about these things, then I will be pleased we have achieved something." Later, she told Next magazine: "Real progress will be when no-one bats an eyelid."

Ardern's parents are now based in Auckland. They're not hard up for money. She has dozens of staff, and doesn't even have to hold her own handbag if she doesn't want to.

Even as I'm writing this, though, I'm thinking, since when does a male leader ever have to acknowledge his privilege? Obviously it's good Ardern takes so much care to do so; it signals that she's aware life for most women is very different to hers, and that combining motherhood and a career is still very difficult for some women and impossible for others, especially those on low incomes.

The Ministry for Women-commissioned research paper Parenthood and labour market outcomes found women working low-wage jobs were less likely to return to work at all, with half still at home 10 years after their first baby. Another study, Empirical evidence of the gender pay gap in New Zealand, explored some of the reasons why. "There are still deeply held societal attitudes and beliefs about the types of work that are appropriate for men and women, the relative importance of occupations where men or women dominate, and the allocation of unpaid work, like caring for children and housework," the Auckland University of Technology researchers wrote. These biases affect the choices both sexes make about what kind of paid work to take on, and people's reluctance to try non-traditional arrangements - such as a man staying home with the kids, or working part-time, the report says.

But how often do you hear a high-profile heterosexual man acknowledging his partner in an interview, and all the childcare and household work she does to enable him to pursue his career? How often does a journalist ask a guy how he juggles fatherhood and work?

Never. You never hear it. This is for two reasons. One: being a father isn't considered a default part of a man's identity in the same way that being a mother is for women. Two: work outside the home is still considered "men's work", and the fact there's someone keeping things ticking over at home (more than likely a woman) is just a boring old given.

Former Green Party MP Holly Walker had a baby while she was in parliament in 2013. The result was that she quit politics and wrote a book about the experience called The Whole Intimate Mess.

"I lasted until my daughter was nine months old before calling it quits," Walker wrote in an opinion piece after Ardern was asked about her baby plans. "I had developed post-natal depression and anxiety, my partner was unwell, and I could no longer take care of myself and my family while trying to do a good job as an MP. It took me months, if not years, to recover. And I was just a junior opposition back bencher." She argued that instead of not asking women questions about work and families, and pretending they don't exist, we should confront the fact that many workplaces - including parliament - are structured in a way that makes it very difficult for mothers. While men at the helm often have kids and families, women in the same positions are more likely to be child-free - suggesting positions of power are not structured to be friendly to mothers.

When I caught Walker on the phone, she was waiting at a bus stop in Wellington. She's now got two kids, 6 and 2, and works for the Office of the Children's Commissioner, where she's about to go back full-time.

"I've just been thinking about all the household administration and caring work that I do and my husband doesn't, and having a sit-down conversation with him about portfolio allocations," she says. "I'm going to present him with a list of options. I can already feel myself getting kind of resentful, so it has to be done."

She told me she thought Ardern's example bodes well for all the societal changes that need to happen to make gender equality possible. "A lot of first-time mums find it really tough, and I was scared people would look at her and think, If she's the prime minister and having a baby, how come I'm having so much difficulty in my real life?

"But I think a lot of people would be aware that she has a massive support system around her, because that's what is needed to do this - the outsourcing of care work and the massive task of running a household.

"A lot of women find when they do go back to work they're doing all their paid work and those jobs on top of that. Something has to give and for me it was the paid work, and I think that factors into a lot of mothers' decisions."

There are, of course, suggestions that even Ardern wasn't ever really planning to do both. She had in the past been open about wanting to start a family at some point, and told an interviewer in 2014 that she didn't want to be leader because she had worked for Helen Clark and seen that "she had to give up everything to do that job, and I feel like I can do all the things I want to do in politics without having to be in that particular role".

It should also be acknowledged that many women want to stay at home, Walker said. "If you had asked me when I was pregnant with my first child, I would have said I was really excited to go back to work.

"I knew she was going to be with her dad. I didn't feel any qualms or any guilt. Well, I didn't feel like that at all. I felt like I was being torn in half being away from her. A lot of people don't feel like that, but a lot of people do."

More value needs to be placed on unpaid work, with household tasks not split by gender. Flexible work policies and the normalising of things such as men leaving work at 3pm to do daycare pick-ups would also help.

"We need to understand when a family has children there's new work that comes into the family, and it's often just assumed that women will do that, then after a year she'll go back but keep doing it. I think that's the way in which the prime minister's example is really going to help - there's a really big, visible example of her husband in a domestic space, and as a result maybe we can encourage more people to do that, and there's a shift that can occur."

I'm the first to admit I don't know exactly what true liberation looks like. It's hard to imagine a world that fully considers women's interests and wellbeing, when we've all been part of this one for so long. But I'm pretty sure it's not just doing more work. That can't be all there is.
