Young Girls Are Confused And Angry About Gender Pay Gap
To achieve gender parity in pay, current estimates show that women will have to wait until 2221 – for another 202 years. Gender pay gap may be seen as an issue that affects only working women, but a new campaign shows that it also affects young girls who are not yet in the labor market. On the International Day of the Girl, it is timely to reflect on the effects of pay equity on our next generations.

Billboard featuring photographs from the campaign in the heart of Times Square, located at 1535 Broadway between 45th and 46th Streets above the Marriot Marquis.
Billboard featuring photographs from the campaign in the heart of Times Square, located at 1535 ... [+]CITI
“We’re launching with creative called ‘The Moment’ featuring the children of Citi colleagues and their reactions to learning about the gender pay gap for the first time in order to spark a broader conversation,” says Carla Hassan, Citi’s Chief Brand Officer. The global bank with presence in over 100 countries became the first U.S. bank to publish unadjusted global pay gap figures earlier this year.

“I feel really angry – it’s as if they don’t want girls to look strong,” says one of the young girls interviewed for the campaign. Others expressed anger, shock, confusion – but also determination to do something about it. It will be at least a decade before some of these girls start working, but this issue is already impacting them.

Behind the scenes of the campaign, produced by Publicis North America and directed and photographed by Kelia Anne MacCluskey
Behind the scenes of the campaign, produced by Publicis North America and directed and photographed ... [+]CITI
“Many of us are jaded by the reality that women are paid less than men. Children, however, have a fresh perspective. The campaign videos and photos are meant to serve as a reminder to never be complacent in the face of inequality, and to push for a faster rate of change,” says Hassan.

There is certainly a need for corporates to step up: A study from 2018 shows that across most of the developed world, only 18% of the largest companies publish gender segregated information on pay. The United States is faring worse than most of the developed world in terms of disclosures: according to Just Capital, only 7% of the largest public U.S. companies have published their results.

“There was not a second of consideration – the kids knew that the pay gap was wrong, and their reactions proved it,” says Kelia Anne MacCluskey, the photographer for the campaign. This is a stark contrast to public attitudes: a study from April 2019 finds that 46% of American men, and 30% of American women, believe that gender pay gap has been made up to serve a political purpose.

 “As adults may feel desensitized by the fact that women make less than men, these kids were righteously disappointed, but also not complacent. Their sincerity and eagerness were confrontational and inspiring. At one point, I was brought to tears by the brilliant, sensitive reaction of a 10-year-old girl (Caitlin),” says MacCluskey.

10-year-old Caitlin said in the video, “I feel like there is just more to us than looking pretty. Some people just don’t see girls doing that.” 
10-year-old Caitlin said in the video, “I feel like there is just more to us than looking pretty. ... [+]CITI
With greater urgency, more dialogues and action, we may be able to support more women rise through the ranks, and close the gender pay gap earlier. The current generation owes it to the next to do better.
