Conflicted Identities and Sexism in Computing
Graduate Programs
Abstract - Stereotypes about women’s place among creators of technology still exist. As a result, women engineers and computer scientists must find ways to manage the conflict between their identities as women and as creators of technology. Many women manage the conflict by hiding or denying their feminine identity. We found that this strategy becomes particularly evident when discussing experiences of sexism. Focus groups with women graduate students identified many instances of sexism, but found that women tended to deny or ignore the sexism. Because sexism communicates the view that women do not fit in the culture of computing, it increases the difficulty of combining a feminine gender identity with a technical identity. Many women try to meet this challenge by minimizing their femininity, or acting like one of the guys. These coping strategies may be effective for enabling individual persistence, but they permit persistence of an inhospitable environment. Adopting practices known to reduce the incidence of sexism and mitigate its negative impact could help retain women graduate students in computing.
Index Terms – computer science engineering, sexism, doctoral education, gender identity
INTRODUCTION
In many cultures, there is a conflict between feminine gender identity and identity as a professional creator of technology [5, 18, 19]. Technology and engineering may be more accommodating to women than in previous decades, but gender stereotypes still exist and masculine culture remains a hallmark of technical fields. As a result, unlike their male colleagues, women engineers and computer scientists must find ways to fit in and to manage the conflict between their professional and gender identities [19].
When attempts to manage conflicting identities are challenged by experiences or observations of sexism, women must find ways to make sense of or respond to the situation. As described here and elsewhere, a common method women employ for managing this identity conflict involves hiding or denying their feminine identity [5, 8, 18]. This method is especially evident in response to sexism, but it raises the risk of departure.
Departure at the graduate level is a substantial loss to computing. By the time women reach the doctoral level in computer science, they have exhibited exceptional interest, drive, and commitment to preparing for a professional life in
S1H-1
October 12 - 15, 2011, Rapid City, SD
percent of all women entering computing graduate programs since 2004.
The Computing Research Association‟s Committee on Women (CRA-W) offers the Graduate Cohort Program, which is a support, networking, mentoring, and role model program for women in CSE graduate programs across the United States and Canada. Graduate women apply to participate in this program, and if funding permits, all applicants are accepted. The first annual meeting was held in 2004 with 101 participants enrolled in Masters or Doctoral programs. In each of the following years, about 150 new members joined the program. In total, the program had 944 Cohort members as of 2010.
All Grad Cohort members are surveyed every year as part of this longitudinal study, and random samples of approximately ten meeting attendees each year participate in a focus group that explores selected issues in greater depth. Participation in the study is voluntary and follows Institutional Review Board requirements for research on human subjects.
II. Data and Analysis
We analyzed qualitative data from the women who attended the Cohort program in 2008, 2009, and 2010. The annual number of participants varied between 8 and 12 per group.
Invitations to the focus groups were sent to a stratified random sample of participants in the Cohort Program. For selection, all attendees who expected to be present at the focus group‟s scheduled time were separated into year in graduate school and international or US citizenship, then randomly selected for representatives from each group. The focus groups met either directly before or after the rest of the Cohort program took place.
Focus group members gathered in a room with the interviewer, who began a semi-structured discussion of their experiences as graduate students. Conversations covered workload, research, and interpersonal experiences with other members of their graduate programs. Topics gradually incorporated issues of gender disparities and the most direct question related to sexism, which usually came toward the end of the focus group, was whether anyone had ever “observed or experienced sexism or discrimination.”
In order to analyze these interviews and determine their significance, each focus group meeting was recorded. The three recordings were transcribed into separate documents. Each member of our team read through the transcripts and noted significant passages. The members then went through the notes and grouped examples together by common theme. The themes each member had compiled were then compared, with the most common and salient themes being placed on the final list. This process both allowed for a thorough examination of all texts, as well as created an opportunity for thematic creation based on multiple perspectives.
978-1-61284-469-5/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE
41st ASEE/IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference
S1H-2
FINDINGS
The computing graduate women in the Grad Cohort focus groups perceived no sexism in their interactions with faculty, advisors or students. Nevertheless, they described many sexist incidents they had observed or experienced. In other words, they almost uniformly denied that their experiences could be considered sexism.
I. No Sexism Perceived
Each year, when first asked about their experiences as women graduate students, none of the focus group participants perceived differences between their experiences and those of their male peers. In fact, several women vehemently denied that there were any differences and objected to the inference that women students were in any way distinguished from men students.
The researcher asked, “Can you tell me what it‟s been like for you being a woman in a computer science or computer engineering graduate program? Just describe it, what your experience has been like.” Initial responses were very positive, and included comments such as, “My experience in grad school has been amazing, and I love my department and I love everyone in it and I‟ve had an amazing experience. I‟m lucky to be in a really great xxx department, which is pretty balanced male and female in both the students and the faculty. I haven‟t experienced anything negative; everyone‟s really respectful and supportive of each other.” “It‟s been a nice experience and the professors are nice.” “I don‟t know that a female at my institution is any different than being a male. ... I think everyone does a good job at mixing well... While there is a lower percentage of people who are women, it‟s not a big deal. The professors treat us equally.” These women were very pleased with their experience in computing graduate programs.
Later in the focus group, the researcher asked, “Have you ever observed or experience sexism or discrimination in your graduate program? Students uniformly responded that they had not, except for some instances of reverse sexism where women were favored. No professors, advisors, nor classmates behaved in sexist ways, according to the focus group participants.
When women simply described their experiences, however, virtually every member of all the focus groups went on to report specific examples of sexism.
II. Sexism is Pervasive
Focus group participants described sexist behaviors by some of their peers, faculty, and professional society members.
Every focus group revealed examples of sexist peers. For example, a 2009 participant described her lab experience as, “15 men and I am the only woman. The lab is not clean, and they think that I should clean it.” A 2008 focus group participant recalled “A classmate always says like, „Why are you in this field? You are women. You can‟t compete with me. You can‟t be better than men in this field.‟” Comments such as these were riddled throughout all three transcripts,
October 12 - 15, 2011, Rapid City, SD
Session S1H

Session S1H
the respect men are afforded, this professor advised they must look like men.
Some women reported intentionally minimizing their feminine characteristics. A 2010 member commented on her religious headscarf as, “a barrier that‟s preventing me from hearing anything, or someone looking at me in a bad way...I was really shocked when I changed the style and I saw the difference in how men deal with me and look at me in a different way.” She believed that her headscarf minimized recognition of her as female.
Beyond their clothing, some women take other steps, such as adopting masculine behaviors, to be “one of the guys.” For example, a 2010 participant stated, “I tend to joke around with my male friends...I check out women with them and I make jokes, and I check out guys with them.” To fit into a male dominated environment, this woman commented on the appearance of other women. Another 2010 interviewee said, “I mean if you want to be part of the guys, you have to [be] accepting about their jokes about women, or whatever they‟re doing that might not be the most comfortable for me.” These comments illustrate ways that women attempted to adapt to an environment that is made to fit the men who comprise the majority of its population.
IV. A Culture of Silence
As reported earlier, many women deny that sexism exists in their departments, even when they go on to describe incidents that clearly are sexist. In some cases, they dismiss a blatantly sexist incident as an anomaly. For example, a 2010 focus group member stated, “The professors treat us equally. And exceptions apply, right, and individual interactions with individual professors can be different. But on the whole, everything‟s good.” She did not consider herself as being subjected to sexism from professors, because not all of her professors were sexist all the time. This perspective allowed incidents to go unnoticed because the victim focuses on a happier big picture.
Even when women recognize a remark as sexist, many choose to let the comment go unchallenged. Graduate programs and industry alike maintain an implicit notion that confronting sexism is frowned upon. One 2010 participant mentioned, “There‟s comments, and it‟s non-stop. I‟ve talked to people in industry, and [they said that] in many ways you don‟t talk about it. That‟s not what you do. You definitely don‟t take note of it; you pretend like it didn‟t happen.” Another member of her group added, “I‟ve spent some time in industry, and the unspoken rule is to not say anything. The spoken rule, of course, is that sexual harassment is a big deal, go to HR. But the unspoken rule is you don‟t.” This culture of silence seems necessary to these women if they wish to preserve their identity as technical professionals.
DISCUSSION
Focus group data from women in the CRA-W Graduate Cohort Program contained reports of sexism in CSE
978-1-61284-469-5/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE
41st ASEE/IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference
providing substantial evidence that women in CSE graduate programs did in fact face sexism from their peers.
Faculty members, it seemed, were unable to stop peer sexism. One woman described an incident that happened when she was an undergraduate. When asked if her instructors knew what had happened, this 2008 participant responded, “Yes, and they constantly tried to stop it. [But they were unsuccessful, because] the students didn‟t care what the faculty said.” These faculty members were apparently ill-equipped to face the problem of sexism among their students, leaving their women students to cope on their own or leave the program.
There appear to be some cases where faculty members failed to inhibit sexism among students because they shared the sexist attitudes. For example, a 2008 Cohort member had a professor tell her, “You know computers aren‟t really for girls. Guys are much better.” Another woman wrote in her survey that, “One faculty member directly suggested a woman should choose between grad school/career and family.” Some faculty cross the line from sexist to more harassing behavior – “My advisor told me that he couldn't help himself from glancing at women‟s' chests.” Given that some professors exhibit such behavior, it should be no wonder that some students do also.
Focus group members who worked in industry before pursuing a graduate degree revealed that sexism also occurs outside academia. A 2010 participant described how a woman colleague at an industry conference, went “to talk to people about serious, technical things that she wanted to build, that she‟s really interested in. And they just blew her off completely; just kind of like, „Well, honey, don‟t you have to worry about your hair?‟”
III. Computing and Gender Identity
Women as well as men share cultural beliefs about gender and technical occupations. The Grad Cohort women are no exceptions. For example a 2009 focus group participant stated, “Women are emotional. I don‟t feel that this is good for a job.” Later in the same group, another participant stated, “I have a problem with women and technology. I went to a session...that shows that women have a harder time staying focused at work. I find myself doing this. Lose productivity.” These assumptions about women‟s general unsuitability for important occupations have implications for women‟s ability to see themselves in technical positions.
Belief that women do not belong in engineering and technology creates a conflict between gender and occupational identity. For example, a 2009 participant described a challenge in dealing with this conflict: “As a woman I like to wear skirts and make-up. In my department you can‟t do it. People would ask if it was a special day. A professor in my department said I should wear more masculine clothes to get more respect.” This advice may have been good, given the reality of conditions in her department, but it rests on the observation that women are not perceived as credible computing professionals and therefore get less respect than their male colleagues. To get
S1H-3
October 12 - 15, 2011, Rapid City, SD

programs, as well as women‟s coping mechanisms, such as playing down a feminine gender or ignoring sexism.
Suppressing knowledge of gender inequalities might help maintain belief that the male-dominated computing environment is gender-neutral, as it does for women engineers [7]. When the sexism is too blatant to deny, some women label the incident as an exception, or justify it as an individual personality defect, other practices observed with women in engineering [14]. These coping strategies may allow women to focus on their studies and persist in their graduate program.
Denial of sexism should not be surprising, because sexism reinforces the idea that women are not “one of the guys” and therefore not a legitmate part of the male- dominated computing world. Sexism amplifies difficulties associated with combining a feminine gender identity and a computing identity. These difficulties can be seen in the shortcomings of some combination strategies. Abandoning a feminine gender identity and attempting to be one of the boys can leave women isolated from both men and women colleagues [5, 14].
Directly dealing with the sexism may not be a very effective strategy either. Male colleagues are prone to dislike women who confront sexism [2]. While women might feel more empowered [15], they could lose access to the networks of professional colleagues that are so important to occupational success.
If women cannot mitigate sexism on their own and ignoring sexism allows it to perpetuate, what can be done to improve conditions for women graduate students? Based on research from other settings, there are several steps known to reduce sexism.
1. Enact highly visible proactive policies of zero tolerance for sexist behavior, and swift corrective action for when it occurs [6]. Credible policies and procedures for handling complaints increase knowledge of what constitutes sexual harassment, what to do if it occurs, and decrease the incidence of sexist behaviors and comments.
2. Form peer groups that provide a sense of belonging, effective communication, advice, and support. Women engineers find that these types of groups are essential not only for career advice and networking, but also for personal development and the sharing of coping strategies [17].
3. Ensure that women graduate students are well- mentored. Mentors offer advice on how to bring up concerns about unequal treatment and may sometimes even bring up the concern themselves [15].
Finally, actively recruiting more women into recruiting graduate programs will change the numerical balance and contribute to a more inclusive culture [10, 21]. Such a culture will make possible a positive combination of both gender and technical identities.