
[title]Of Female Cops and Docs:
The Reformulation of Workplace Dramas
and Other Trends in Mixed-Sex Ensembles
[content]One of the first representational issues targeted by feminist criticism was television’s
limited depiction of women as workers outside of the home. The
single-woman character dates to television’s early years; however, depictions
of women in the workforce after marriage or in lieu of homemaking and
motherhood did not appear in a significant manner until the 1970s, and even
then often enforced hegemonic American gender roles. Dramatic franchise
series about male detectives, doctors, and lawyers have long told stories about
the duties of work, but women rarely had a space in these worlds. Few stories
about the work women do outside the home have been featured by television
narratives, and until recently, stories about career women have primarily
chronicled their struggle and difficulty with balancing careers, motherhood,
marriage, and traditional constructs of femininity.
Second-wave feminism’s emphasis on seeking equality for women in the
public sphere made creating career opportunities for women the central activist
project, and the results endure as one of the movement’s greatest legacies.
Like the changing American workplace,U.S. television series increasingly
incorporated working women into their casts,with marked change beginning
in the 1970s and early 1980s.As explored in the introduction, depictions of female
characters pursuing professional careers developed for self-serving reasons
when advertisers realized the consumption power of real-world working
women.1 Consequently, the stories about working women that did emerge in
dramatic series focused on one particular type of work—that of the career
woman.Dramatic stories about working women continued to ignore the work
done by poor and most middle-class women, just as the working class has been
nearly absent from U.S. television throughout its history.
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:13:40 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Television depictions of career women have drawn attention as apparently
feminist by definition because of characters’ access to spaces outside of the
home.2 The careers of characters in The Mary Tyler Moore Show, Murphy
Brown, Cagney and Lacey, and even Charlie’s Angels were seen as progressive
because their pursuit of careers indicated cultural importance, regardless of
other, less feminist narrative and representational aspects. In the 1980s, female
characters began more frequently appearing in roles with narrative significance,
as they moved from secretary and nurse to detective and doctor.3
Embodying career roles, however, still did not lead to many stories about
women and their work.4
As stories about working women increased in the 1980s, two narrative
trends developed that effectively contained the exploration of new stories
about women in career roles. As women pursued a liberal feminist agenda
that required assimilation into male-dominated workplaces, television series
featured stories that suggested women are ill-suited for professional roles
or could not be both mothers and career women. The career opportunities
afforded these characters led to repeated stories about women’s difficulty
participating in the workforce, a reasonable story in moderation, as many
real women likely had such experiences, but not as a primary type of story
repeated across many series. The underlying message of these stories often
suggested that women should concede their careers; Baby Boom, L.A. Law,
and thirtysomething provide examples of such characters grappling with new
gender scripts and modes of femininity.5
In contrast, other series presented stories that simply assumed women
could balance work in the public sphere and at home with no difficulty.Networks
depicted female characters who traversed the boundary between work
and home, many of whom were primarily included in narratives set in the
home. Such characterizations contributed to creating the “superwoman” who
breezed through occupational demands (always off camera) and “second
shift” duties at home (The Cosby Show, Family Ties,Growing Pains). These series
rarely told stories about women doing work, despite attempting to associate
themselves with the progressive trend of depicting women as qualified
to work outside the home.
Even series that represented women as able workers and avoided narratives
about the challenges they faced in the workplace had difficulty constructing
stories that resonated with audiences. Despite the narrative importance
of her role and the occupational power of her character, Joyce
Davenport (Veronica Hamel) of Hill Street Blues presented a narrowly defined
“career-woman femininity” that some female viewers found alienating,
contradicting producers’ efforts to offer empowered characters.6 The
Of Female Cops and Docs 145
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:13:40 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
tough veneer worn by Davenport and her contemporaries—a revised femininity
donned to survive sexist public spaces—further indicates the challenges
in characterization and storytelling strategy that emerged as series
began integrating women into the workplace.
The newness of the type, the network-era institutional context, and the
conservative political era of backlash in which these series aired led each
character to bear a tremendous representational burden. The paucity of
working-women characters and the dominance of role-model frameworks
for analysis led these characters to serve as bellwethers for understanding
and communicating cultural shifts.Many of these shows could have told a
greater diversity of stories about women in the workplace, but the attention
to these characters as indicative of the success of feminist efforts provided a
narrative straightjacket.
By the late 1990s, however, depictions of female characters’ choices in work
and motherhood derived new meaning.The new multiplicity and diversity of
female characters required new critical models for assessing representations.
Where the depiction of Amy Gray’s struggle in balancing work and life as a
single mother might have been interpreted as a cautionary tale in the 1980s,
by the 1990s her situation had gained social acceptance, and Judging Amy circulated
among a broad range of other stories about women, work, and family.
This makes it possible to assess this story as a service to those women with
whom her struggles resonate, rather than as a conservative attempt to send her
back to a failed marriage or into the domestic sphere. The “diversity” of female
representations remains limited to those who are white, conventionally
attractive, and for the most part, upper-middle-class, but the breadth of female
characters at the center of narratives requires that critics account for the
changed cultural context and representational environment. Despite various
cultural and institutional changes, employment in a professional career remains
a crucial component of female representations that critics consider progressive.
7
Workplace dramas tell stories distinctive from those featured in other narrative
types regardless of the universal presence of careers among the characters
in the female-centered dramas at the turn of the twenty-first century. The
heroines in action dramas often perform jobs that are secondary to their main
capacity as warriors, but regardless of the nontraditional nature of this “employment,”
the heroines’ saving-the-world activities primarily circumscribe
them as nondomestic or as workers. Similarly, careers provide a defining feature
of the comedic drama’s new-woman characters, although the stories rarely
emphasize the characters facing challenges because of their professional status.
Ally McBeal and Sex and the City (despite their varying narrative occupa-
146 redesigning women
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:13:40 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
tion of “work” spaces) use storylines resulting from the characters’ professions,
such as the cases Ally works on and the stories Carrie writes, to probe
issues related to their personal lives.Protagonist-centered family dramas often
depict the characters struggling to balance professional activities and their personal
lives, and many also focus on characters performing career tasks. The
workplace cannot become of primary importance, however, because of the
narrative equilibrium these series seek between stories of the protagonists’ professional
duties and their roles as daughter, mother, or sister.Mixed-sex workplace
ensembles and series with mostly female casts, such as Strong Medicine
and The Division, provide distinctive narratives that explore stories about public
spaces and a diverse range of female characters.
Narrative and Thematic Attributes of Workplace Dramas
The predominant types of dramatic series throughout U.S. broadcast history—
the police/detective procedural, the law drama, and medical series—
reappear with unfailing consistency because of the sorts of stories their settings
allow them to explore. These occupations are well-suited for the
episodic nature of television storytelling, as workers in these professions constantly
interact with new individuals with new problems, generating new stories.
Although E.R. may only bear slight resemblance to Ben Casey or NYPD
Blue to Naked City, the regular recurrence and gradual evolution of these series
reveals much about changes in U.S. culture, from our understanding of
diseases and cures to our varying faith in systems of law and order. The central
place that workplace dramas occupy in American television storytelling
has made them a crucial space for the integration of women; their unfailing
repetition and recombination enables critics to trace the gradual progress of
female characters into positions of narrative importance.
The predecessors of the characters in Strong Medicine and The Division, like
the women of the second-wave generation, did not find themselves in workspaces
accepting of women pursuing careers. Stories about female characters
in ensemble narratives often focused on their struggle to infiltrate male spaces
and be seen as equals in their colleagues’ eyes. These stories emphasize female
characters’ difficulty balancing their careers with romantic partnership and
child rearing or depict male characters questioning their abilities because they
are women. Significantly, such stories persist; recent examples depicting complications
for female workers include Jamie Ross (Carey Lowell) resigning her
assistant district attorney position on Law and Order because her ex-husband
threatens to challenge her custody of their child because of the number of
hours she works, or the surgeon Kate Austin (Christine Lahti) encountering a
Of Female Cops and Docs 147
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:13:40 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
similar situation on Chicago Hope and losing custody of her daughter. The
final season of Homicide: Life on the Street depicts the challenges Detective
Rene Sheppard (Michael Michele) experiences in gaining the respect of other
detectives because she was once a beauty-pageant winner and is still an exceptionally
attractive woman.Her partner and colleagues are skeptical of her
ability to handle the physical aspects of her job.8
As part of the shifts in recurring narratives explored through workplace
dramas, it is worth noting that some series also emphasize the effect of family
demands on male characters—a challenge traditionally faced only by female
characters.Harvey Lacey of Cagney and Lacey provided an early example
of a trend that has since expanded to primary male characters. Early
seasons of E.R. reversed the situation in which narratives punished women
for having demanding careers with repercussions in their family life when Dr.
Mark Greene’s (Anthony Edwards) marriage ends in divorce because he is
unable to devote time to the relationship.His wife later remarries and moves
away, which leaves Greene with limited access to his daughter, again because
of his career. Dr. Peter Benton (Eriq La Salle) faces a similar challenge in trying
to share custody of his infant son with the child’s mother. The child’s deafness
exacerbates Benton’s struggle, and the series often depicts the impossibility
of balancing the demands of work with the needs of his child. He
ultimately resigns from his hectic schedule as an emergency surgeon to gain
custody of his son following the death of the child’s mother; Detective Rey
Curtis (Benjamin Bratt) leaves his job entirely to care for his chronically ill
wife and their children on Law and Order. Although not emphasized here,
the changes in the stories told by late 1990s dramas about women also affect
the stories told about men. These series alter previous norms so that female
characters increasingly appear as able careerists, and male characters come to
realize the family/work double-bind that has long troubled women.
Even ensemble workplace series such as Law and Order,Homicide, and E.R.
do not tell uniform stories about women in the workplace. The professional
roles of women appear more naturalized, so that many characters appear as
doctors, lawyers, and detectives who are women, rather than as women doctors,
lawyers, and detectives. This naturalization of women into historically
male-dominated careers illustrates an expansion in the range of narratives.
The de-emphasis on gender helps series move beyond stories confined to debating
the ability of female characters to balance work and home. For example,
Law and Order and E.R. do not depict their doctors, lawyers, and lieutenants
as women performing jobs so much as they are people performing
jobs. The shift from highlighting gender when a woman occupies a professional
role indicates an acceptance of women in these positions.
The development of “reconfigured” workplace dramas provides the most
148 redesigning women
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:13:40 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
notable innovation for workplace series in the late 1990s. Strong Medicine
(2000–2006) and The Division (2001–4) both air on Lifetime and move beyond
incorporating women into traditionally male spaces to allow them to
dominate these spaces in rank and number.9 Neither series primarily explores
stories about women who struggle in their careers because they are women.
They also offer the broadest depiction of women as a group composed of individuals
with varied needs, experiences, and privileges.10
In addition to these reconfigured workspaces, some mixed-sex ensemble
series have integrated female characters so that they are no longer exceptional.
This development was evident in a variety of series by the early 1990s: doctors
in E.R.; detectives in NYPD Blue, Law and Order: Special Victims Unit,
and Homicide: Life on the Street; and lawyers in Law and Order and Family
Law. The characters in these mixed-sex ensembles are similar to those in
Strong Medicine and The Division; however, the overwhelmingly female composition
of the latter series and their location on a network that specifically
targets female audiences enable them to explore stories about women on a
weekly basis. Such stories may only receive attention once or twice a season
in the mixed-sex ensemble series.
A Space of Their Own:
Lifetime’s Female-Dominated Workplaces
I have emphasized commonalities by delimiting the characteristics of the type
and exploring how prevailing motifs, themes, and elements recur across the
series to indicate the similarities and differences of the stories told within each
and among all of the narrative types. The workplace dramas require less explanation
as a dramatic form; they are defined by their institutional setting,
the presence of female characters in professional careers, and their focus on
telling stories about the lives of women. In this chapter I examine each series
separately and note the different narrative strategies they use to tell stories
about women who work in spaces accepting of their presence. Strong Medicine
and The Division provide an unprecedented opportunity for storytelling,
although they pursue the objective of reaching female audience members
through disparate means. Their variation indicates the diversity possible
among series with similar composition and demographic targets and also suggests
the breadth of stories workplace dramas can explore.
Strong Medicine
Strong Medicine was the first of Lifetime’s female-centered workplace dramas.
It focuses on two doctors, Luisa (Lu) Delgado (Rosa Blasi) and Dana
Of Female Cops and Docs 149
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:13:40 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Stowe (Janine Turner).11 The pilot episode depicts Lu operating a street-front
clinic for women and “those they love and care for” in inner-city Philadelphia.
This is the neighborhood in which she grew up; the community helped
her to pay for medical school, and she now serves them with the aid of a grant.
On the other side of town, Dana works at the prestigious Rittenhouse Hospital
as one of the nation’s top women’s health experts. She serves a very different
clientele with similar needs. A variety of narrative complications result
in Lu losing her clinic and Rittenhouse opening a women’s clinic that both
doctors must share. The first season emphasizes the differences between the
doctors, their outlooks on medicine, and the options afforded to their patients.
The series explores this area in subsequent seasons, but it becomes a
less primary narrative focus. Janine Turner left the series during the third season,
and her character was replaced by Dr.Andy Campbell (Patricia Richardson).
Andy spent her career as a military doctor prior to joining Rittenhouse,
which allows her to remain distinctive from Lu while creating different interpersonal
and professional conflicts than those between Lu and Dana.Andy
was appointed U.S. surgeon general in the final episode of the fifth season,
and the series altered its form by replacing her with a male doctor,Dylan West
(Rick Schroder) at the beginning of the sixth season.
Strong Medicine distinguishes itself from more general hospital franchise
series through its focus on two female physicians and the problems that arise
in a clinic for women. The series resembles medical dramas such as E.R. or
Chicago Hope in its visual style, episode organization, and narrative emphases.
Lu and Dana face dilemmas about how to best treat patients and obligations
to a bottom-line-oriented hospital director, and the series occasionally
explores the issues they face in their personal lives. Neither doctor
is married, but Lu has an adolescent son, and Dana develops a romantic relationship
with a male resident, which introduces narrative complications.
Andy’s marriage provides the focus of stories told about her in her first season.
She is married to a man who was laid off and then struggles with his
role as house husband and in accepting the duty of raising the couple’s young
teenage daughters, which eventually leads to uncontrolled anger and domestic
violence against Andy. She forces him out of the house pending angermanagement
therapy; his refusal to seek help results in their divorce.
Strong Medicine also differs considerably from Heartbeat, a similarly constructed
series ABC attempted in 1988.12 Heartbeat featured containment narratives
in which female doctors had to choose either personal or professional
lives, a tension that is embodied by the lead character, Dr. Joanne Springsteen
(Kate Mulgrew). The different social contexts of the late 1980s and the early
2000s allow the concept of a women’s clinic run by women doctors to have
150 redesigning women
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:13:40 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
a different level of distinction. In Strong Medicine, Rittenhouse’s mission to
serve women across the socioeconomic spectrum receives narrative emphasis
in a way that suggests that the notion of a women’s clinic or the predominance
of female doctors no longer seems exceptional. In Heartbeat, the creation
of a women’s clinic managed by female doctors functions as a point of
narrative tension.
Three narrative aspects make the stories Strong Medicine tells particularly
distinctive: the centrality of women’s stories in the case of doctors and patients,
the emphasis on episodic stories about patients over those of the doctors,
and the hybrid entertainment and educative function of the narratives.
The series explores conventional stories about its doctors, as Lu, Dana, and
Andy struggle with moral dilemmas in caring for their patients.13 Such storylines
allow the series to interrogate the causes of the doctors’ ambivalence
about certain treatments in dealing with matters that affect the lives of their
female patients, their patients’ partners, and children. Narratives do not
query the doctors’ abilities, a common plot in medical dramas.
The emphasis on the doctors’ struggles to resolve life-threatening predicaments
suggests their centrality to Strong Medicine’s narratives, but Dana and
Lu serve mainly as conduits through which the series tells the female patients’
stories. This narrative strategy distinguishes the series from a medical drama
such as E.R., which foregrounds the doctors and hospital workers. Emphasizing
patients’ stories means that the series is organized episodically, as new
patients enter in the opening scene of each episode and provide a “diseaseof-
the-week” crisis that must be alleviated by the end. By the third season,
the series began emphasizing the personal lives of the two doctors more regularly,
slightly decreasing the focus on patients’ stories. Even with this readjustment,
patients’ stories and situations are more developed than is common
among coterminous medical series.
Strong Medicine’s narrative emphasis on patients enables the third feature
of the series: educating viewers through fictional storytelling. In each episode,
the doctors cite statistics, health concerns, and discuss good health practices
in an explicitly educative manner that clearly links storytelling with education
about women’s health issues.Most episodes begin with Lu facilitating a
women’s support group, to whom she explains new developments in women’s
health care and preventative protocols. Because the series is based in a
women’s clinic, it explores disorders that disproportionately affect women in
a way that introduces lesser-known ailments, their symptoms, and the importance
of medical treatment. The series often addresses the subordinate
status of women’s medicine and the inadequacy of medical models that consider
women as smaller versions of men. The official Strong Medicine Web
Of Female Cops and Docs 151
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:13:40 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
page on Lifetime’s site reinforces the explicit educative function of the television
narratives. Information about the series such as cast biographies and
episode guides are secondary to various medical resources, including a link
to women’s health resources, an expanded description of the disease of the
week, links to groups discussing women’s health issues, and an “ask the expert”
column.
A noteworthy difference in storytelling emerged when Lifetime debuted
its Women Docs (2001–2) series, a reality show designed to anchor the spinoff
Lifetime Real Women network. Each week this series presents a day-inthe-
life glimpse of four women doctors, with a new location and new group
of doctors in each episode. In contrast to Strong Medicine, these stories focus
on the doctors and their lives. The dilemmas faced by Lu and Dana are somewhat
mirrored in the real doctors’ decisions regarding medical protocol, although
their quandaries are rarely as ethically complex as those explored in
the fictional series. The series focuses on doctors rather than patients for practical
reasons, primarily issues of privacy. The combination of these two series
on Lifetime aids the network in establishing a brand that centers upon women
and presents programming that seeks to serve entertainment and educative
functions.
Paradoxically, the “real” depiction of medicine,Women Docs, does not pursue
the educative agenda clearly established in the fictional Strong Medicine.
Women Docs emphasizes personalities,with new “characters” each week, and
it explores the doctors’ personal lives in greater depth than Strong Medicine.
Audiences hear about the difficulty of balancing home and professional life;
the doctors express guilt about the hours they spend away from their children,
admit the difficulty of maintaining balance in a career that often requires eighty
hours of work per week, and acknowledge their sense of accomplishment in
the work they do.Various doctors also have addressed the effects of having few
female classmates and colleagues on their feelings about their work and have
told stories of being mistaken for nurses because they are women.Having the
challenges of the workplace articulated by “real” women provides a different
narrative effect than when fictional texts address similar issues, and this alters
the viewer’s relationship to these ideas. The doctors’ challenges evoke a sympathetic
response and ally the audience with their struggles.Although the “stories”
told in Women Docs resonate with the challenges fictional characters faced
in 1980s series, it is difficult to find evidence of a containment strategy.Where
networks targeted the 1980s ensemble dramas to mixed-sex audiences, Lifetime’s
female niche makes this televisual space one of women talking with
women, which allows the stories about work-related struggles to function more
as stories told in confidence than as containment.
152 redesigning women
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:13:40 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Despite the conventions of Strong Medicine and its clear attempts to fit
within yet vary from the medical drama franchise, the series enables some of
the most radically distinct stories of any of the series that air contemporaneously.
General medical dramas have not introduced topics such as bleeding
fibroids, the dilemmas of becoming a surrogate mother, or the disparate medical
opportunities available to poor and upper-class women within the cultural
arena, but these stories are possible for Strong Medicine because of its
narrative construction and Lifetime’s niche focus. The stories it tells provide
multiple points of distinction. The women’s clinic allows for repeated and
sustained stories about less-common women’s health issues. The emphasis
on patients’ stories shifts the typical identification point for viewers from the
all-knowing physician and provides an opportunity to explore the difficulties
poor women face in the absence of universal health care. Its most noteworthy
accomplishment, allowing patients a voice—particularly those who
are working-class and underprivileged—expands stories available to female
audiences and is feminist in nature, providing a service for women beyond
narrative entertainment. Lifetime’s ability to augment the Strong Medicine
stories with those of real Women Docs allows the network to also tell developed
stories about the experiences of female physicians in a narrative space
that is supportive rather than threatening.
The Division
In contrast to Strong Medicine’s emphasis on patients to introduce narratives,
The Division uses its regular cast of characters to explore the intricacies of
women’s lives.Many of the victims of the crimes they investigate are women,
but the series does not develop these episodic characters with the depth afforded
to the patients of Strong Medicine. The victims serve as catalysts for
storylines about the detectives or for providing greater character depth, a conventional
narrative organization among contemporary workplace dramas.
The Division’s large cast, five detectives and their female captain, aids its internal
focus.14 Its emphasis on the personal lives of recurring characters affords
it a more developed serial component than Strong Medicine.
The cast has shifted slightly over the course of the series. Captain Katelyn
McCafferty (Bonnie Bedelia) commands the San Francisco unit. She is a divorced
white woman with a complicated relationship with her adult daughter
who resents Kate’s commitment to her career. Kate belongs to the generation
that first integrated the police force, and she understands her status as
a woman in a police organization differently than the detectives. Detective
Jinny Exstead (Nancy McKeon) is a talented cop, a single white woman from
a law-enforcement family, but she begins the series on an alcoholic spiral of
Of Female Cops and Docs 153
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:13:40 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
destruction. Detective Magda Ramirez (Lisa Vidal), a Latina single mother,
partners with Exstead after beginning the series with a married male partner
who requests a transfer after she rebukes his romantic advances. Detective
C.D. DeLorenzo (Tracey Needham) finds herself with a new partner,Angela
Reide (Lela Rochon Fuqua), in the first season, after her previous partner
(with whom she was having an affair) killed himself.Reide, an African American,
advanced through the ranks quickly and has little street experience.After
Rochon Fuqua leaves the series, DeLorenzo partners with Nate Basso (Jon
Hamm), the only regular male character on the series. Raina Washington
(Taraji Henson), an African American raised by white lesbian mothers, begins
the series as a uniformed officer assigned to the squad room and later
becomes a detective. Stacy Newland (Amy Jo Johnson), a young white woman
from a privileged background, replaces her as a uniformed officer in the
fourth season.
The factors complicating the characters’ personal lives provide much of
their differentiation, as the series depicts all of them as able officers.Many of
the detectives have complicated personal and family relationships, and much
of the weekly story focuses on them discussing personal crises with their partners
while going through the motions of police work.Many of these stories
create ongoing difficulties for the characters that span multiple episodes and
even seasons. For example, the father of Ramirez’s child returns after an eightyear
absence and desires to create a traditional family. The couple eventually
marries, but her husband’s constant traveling leads her to have an affair, and
he leaves again after she confesses.Her storyline also chronicles her son’s fight
with leukemia and her complicated relationship with her sister. Similarly,
Exstead begins the series as a recklessly promiscuous drunk and requires an
intervention by the force and her family at the end of the first season. She
goes to rehab but becomes addicted to painkillers after she returns. She marries
a man she meets in rehab and divorces him a few months later. She marries
again after apparently overcoming her addictions and becoming pregnant.
Meanwhile, her family life is complicated by history (her mother
committed suicide when she was a child). One of her brothers is gay and
struggles to come out to the family and police force; her other brother is killed
in the line of duty; and she learns that her father (a retired officer) had a wife
and child she and her brothers never knew about. This sample of two characters’
storylines suggests the types of stories the series focuses on and its emphasis
on the detectives and nonpolice matters.
Ongoing work-related stories filled with this type of melodrama are less
frequent, although each episode features the detectives solving a crime. A long
plotline chronicles difficult dealings between McCafferty and a sexist police
154 redesigning women
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:13:40 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
chief and then her pursuit of his job after he is killed, and Exstead’s future on
the force is uncertain in the early seasons in which she battles addictions and
various internal review boards threaten her employment. Each episode of The
Division features a homicide the characters must solve, which requires some
narrative time spent tracking down leads and interrogating suspects, but narratives
about solving crimes are emphasized much less than in a series such
as Homicide: Life on the Street or Law and Order. NYPD Blue provides a better
comparison, particularly in later seasons in which the personal lives of
Sipowicz, Simone, Russell, and Sorenson dominate the narrative, although
crime solving is more central than in The Division. The Division creates a
workplace environment dominated by female characters and then emphasizes
intimate aspects of their lives and personality that bear little relation to
their professional duties. The series depicts discussions of crime solving and
their personal lives much more than it attends to their doing—plot action is
minimal, and standard cop-show fare such as chase scenes or action sequences
are negligible (which may also be a budgetary factor related to airing on a
basic cable network).
The stories told by and about the female workplace ensemble in The Division
focus on working women coping with their jobs and the problems they
encounter. These problems rarely result from the fact that they are women;
the crises are presented as problems working people commonly face, and the
narratives depict the characters enduring these struggles. The disparity in the
types of stories told by Strong Medicine, The Division, and even Women Docs
indicates the inadequacy of workplace settings as a predictor of story type.
The Division offers little innovation, tells few original stories, and mainly provides
a different version of the cop series by exploring interpersonal relationships
among officers more than the work they perform. Like Strong Medicine,
The Division attends more to diversity among women than any of the
other dramas.While Strong Medicine emphasizes stories about class difference,
The Division is notable for the ethnic diversity of its cast—a diversity
the series attends to in storylines rather than allowing it to exist only as window
dressing. The series also introduces stories about other socially subordinated
groups through the families of the detectives.Washington was raised
by a white lesbian couple; McCafferty’s daughter and Exstead’s brother are
gay, and the series uses them to explore stories about prejudice, discrimination,
and closeting. Basso’s sister has Down’s syndrome, and the series includes
multiple stories about her and her group home.Because the detectives
all have the same job, class is not a central issue in this series; The Division
constructs the differences among the characters as related to their variant demographic
features.
Of Female Cops and Docs 155
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:13:40 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
The Division immediately evokes comparisons with Cagney and Lacey, a
groundbreaking series that preceded it by nearly twenty years. The series are
very different and indicate the changes in American culture and the television
industry.Where Christine and Mary Beth often retreated to the women’s
room for conferences, the squad room of The Division features more women
than men, and the series rarely draws attention to the characters’ status as
women or outsiders. Julie d’Acci’s comprehensive study of Cagney and Lacey
examines CBS’s creative interference to make it acceptable to mainstream audiences,
including the recasting of Christine Cagney for the more conventionally
feminine Sharon Gless and the network’s mandate that she be glamorous
and linked to upper-class family wealth.15 In contrast, The Division
depicts the characters and their duties with a grittier tone (although not as
gritty as Hill Street Blues) and makes the differences among the women more
complex than those of class and marital status. The writers and producers
clearly expend little time balancing the femininity of their characters with
dominant norms, which CBS constantly required of Cagney and Lacey. The
arrival and relative success of Strong Medicine and The Division suggest noteworthy
gains, as their workplace settings dominated by female characters
make stories about professional women and those they encounter a primary
narrative focus that mixed-sex ensemble workplace series can feature only on
occasion.
Notable Stories in Mixed-Sex Ensembles
In addition to the reconfigured workplaces of Strong Medicine and The Division,
a few mixed-sex workplace series require mention. Each provides
some distinction particularly relevant to the topic of telling stories about
women, whether through characterization or in their ability to explore stories
pertinent to contemporary gender issues and politics. Female characters
engaged in professional careers proliferated in mixed-sex workplace dramas
in the late 1990s and early 2000s; there are far too many to explore the
varied significance of each. I address these four series because of their distinction
(or lack of distinction, in one case). The possibility of disagreement
with my selection, arising because of the plurality of representations, is a significant
departure from the uniform agreement of previous eras that was
possible only because of the paucity of representations and stories.
These series are distinct from many of the others considered in this book
because they are less clearly intended for female viewers or do not emphasize
the telling of women’s stories. These series circulate widely, are closely related
to the stories told by Strong Medicine and The Division, and suggest possibil-
156 redesigning women
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:13:40 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
ities for the representation of women in workplaces even when female characters
do not dominate these spaces. The multiplicity of female characters in
Strong Medicine and The Division allows these series to reflect vast differences
among women, this diversity is less evident in mixed-sex workplace series,
which remain dominated by a fairly monolithic view of femininity and female
perspectives.
Family Law
The CBS series Family Law (1999–2002) came the closest to bringing a femalecentered
ensemble to a generally targeted broadcast network. This series debuted
alongside Judging Amy and Once and Again and originally seemed part
of the female-centered trend emerging in the late 1990s. It begins from a similar
narrative premise as The Trials of Rosie O’Neill: Lynn Holt’s (Kathleen
Quinlan) husband and law partner leaves their marriage and takes the couple’s
legal clients with him. Lynn opens a new firm that specializes in family
law and subleases office space to three other lawyers,with whom she forms a
partnership in the second season. Family Law focuses on the stories of the
families who come to Holt’s firm for representation, although the lawyers and
their legal maneuvering remains central to the narrative. The series explores
situations similar to the court cases in Judging Amy, such as dilemmas of family,
child crime, and custody in a society complicated by divorce and crimes
perpetrated by and against children. One of the original four characters and
two of six in the second season are male, which allows the series to create a
primarily female workspace, but one that affords more space to men than
Strong Medicine or The Division. The series’ home on CBS, however, makes
its stories more widely circulated: Family Law drew four to five times the number
of viewers as the Lifetime series.
Family Law ambivalently depicts the legal structure governing families and
children.Viewers’ sympathy frequently aligns with losing interests, which also
corresponds with Judging Amy’s complex and pessimistic portrayal of justice.
This creates a tone similar to that of Strong Medicine, where patients often
die, and the episodic resolution frequently denies a happy ending.These narratives
challenge viewers. The stories provide persuasive evidence on both
sides of an issue, as in an episode that puts a face on teen male violence, gives
him a mother who loves him, and also depicts the families of his victims. Such
ambivalence is certainly not unique to series with an atypical number of female
characters; Law and Order also features such stories. The centrality of a
multiplicity of female characters enables the series to explore women’s varied
perspectives and beliefs in an attempt to understand and negotiate complicated
social problems.The female characters in Family Law often clash be-
Of Female Cops and Docs 157
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:13:40 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
cause of disparate ideological positions, despite the uniformity of uppermiddle-
class, white, female characters (at least in the first season).
Among the broad array of female-centered dramas appearing in the late
1990s, Family Law most closely replicates the reconfigured workplace drama
on a mainstream, general-interest broadcast network.As the analysis of Strong
Medicine and The Division illustrates, this type of series provides important
innovations to working-woman characters by allowing them self-determined
spaces. Family Law offers audiences not specified as female a narrative that
examines issues through multiple viewpoints and emphasizes a diversity of
female perspectives. The emergence of reconfigured workplaces on Lifetime
indicates a preliminary adjustment in the stories told about working women
on television, but for such stories to move to a general-interest broadcaster
suggests further gains.
Third Watch
NBC’s Third Watch (1999–2005), a series about a group of police officers,
emergency crews, and firefighters who work third shift, provides one of the
most unusual and noteworthy representations of and distinctive stories about
a female worker. Officer Faith Yokus (Molly Price) is a New York City beat
cop, the primary provider for her family, and she is partnered with a racist
and sexist male officer. The series’ depiction of less-glamorous civil service
roles is atypical in 1990s television; Third Watch lacks lawyers or detectives in
expensive suits and is populated with “anyman” and “anywoman” characters
who did not go to college and refer to their workplaces as jobs rather than
careers.Yokus is one of three women in the series (one each in the police, fire,
and emergency teams throughout most seasons), and she is characterized
with rich depth. After a first season of narratives organized by the action of
the teams responding to emergencies, Third Watch began its second season
by focusing on one character in each episode,which allowed previously lacking
characterization. In the second season, the series explored Faith’s character
in two episodes in which it told dramatic stories about a working-class
woman—a type of story long absent from U.S. television screens.16
With the exception of Any Day Now’s Mary Elizabeth, the female characters
discussed throughout this book are all privileged with at least uppermiddle-
class lifestyles that are signified by a lack of attention to financial
matters and the depiction of characters’ material goods, a representation
common on U.S. television.17 Working-class stories with female characters
have emerged occasionally, but only comedic series have survived more than
a few airings (Roseanne, Grace Under Fire). Even dramatic workplace series
158 redesigning women
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:13:40 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
that emphasize a character with a working-class background (such as Strong
Medicine) predominately offer stories about her career or focus on her transition
into a new class status rather than highlighting working-class struggles.
Stories linked to Faith’s class status expose narratives otherwise unavailable
and give voice to the realities faced by many of television’s viewers.
Faith’s family’s survival depends on her paycheck, denying her the dilemma
of whether or not she should work. Her husband is the children’s primary
caregiver by default; he is laid off early in the series and struggles to
find work. Later, he has a nearly fatal heart attack that necessitates more
home rest, again exacerbating the family’s reliance on Faith’s income. Her
class status requires that she confront issues through a different lens than
her upper-class counterparts. In the second-season episodes that focus on
Faith, she faces an unwanted pregnancy and decides to have an abortion,
and later she experiences an identity crisis in frustration with the lack of options
in her life. Particularly in the abortion episode, Third Watch tells the
story of a woman negotiating a limited set of possibilities and an economic
reality that leaves little “choice” at all.18 Faith elects not to tell her husband
about the pregnancy because he would want to have the child, and she knows
they can barely afford their life with two children. Rather than the typical
depiction of an unwanted pregnancy (which often saves the woman from
making a decision by having her miscarry or not really be pregnant after all),
Third Watch portrays a woman who has neither options nor a support system
during the crisis.Her partner refuses to consider abortion as an option,
which necessitates that she lie to him and tell him she lost the baby due to
an injury sustained in the line of duty. The episode closes with Faith alone
in a sterile and impersonal clinic. She keeps the decision to herself until the
truth emerges two seasons later to complicate her relationships with her partner,
husband, and daughter. Their anger and distrust further punishes her.
Third Watch anchors its stories and representations of female workers in a
gritty realism of struggle rather than a liberal fantasy of achievement and
equality. The series depicts women in nontraditional fields where they must
deal with sexism and a testosterone-dominated environment. There is no room
for impassioned feminist speeches or legal maneuvers to secure equality; the
series depicts women coping with challenging realities with few options but
to survive. Third Watch contributes a vital perspective to the stories told about
women in the late 1990s and early twenty-first century. Its acknowledgment
of working-class struggles—even when not focused specifically on a female
character or gender issue—exposes a set of stories and gender relations that
are vital to creating a diversity of stories about women and their lives.
Of Female Cops and Docs 159
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:13:40 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Law and Order: Special Victims Unit
Another workplace ensemble series that deserves specific mention for its
contribution to telling stories about or for women is a spinoff of one of television’s
most successful workplace franchises. Despite its naming and association
with the long-running Law and Order (1990–), SVU (1999–) breaks
from its originator’s dual police procedural/legal drama form to primarily
explore procedural narratives.As was vogue by the 1990s, the series includes
female cast members—one of the primary detectives, the assistant district
attorney, and the medical examiner assigned to the unit are women. It is
principally relevant to this discussion because of its emphasis on crimes
against women. It depicts a police division trained to investigate crimes
against “special victims,” who are most often women and children who suffer
sexual crimes. The narratives emphasize the crime and the process of investigation
but offer limited examination of the officers’ personal lives.SVU
primarily tells the stories of its victims rather than the detectives. The inordinate
number of women victims whose stories are told makes SVU worthy
of mention in this context.
SVU treads a fine line between drawing awareness to crimes against women
and exploiting these crimes. Stories about rape provide one of the most frequently
explored topics for this series, although rape stories had established
a place in cop, doc, and legal franchises long before SVU’s debut.19 The series
offers valuable narratives validating the experience of female victims, depicting
systems of support for those who suffer domestic abuse or rape, and
reiterating that these crimes are not her fault. However, weekly explorations
of gruesome and horrific crimes (the combination of sex and violence that
often attracts high ratings) repeatedly victimize women.SVU uses an episodic
organization that commonly isolates the women’s stories to forty-eight minutes
of narrative time, which prevents in-depth exploration of the character
or her process of recovery.20 In this way, the series does not so much tell a diversity
of stories about women who recover from deplorable crimes so much
as it repeatedly tells a variation of their victimization.
Like Strong Medicine and Family Law, SVU opens a space for stories about
situations that predominately affect women.SVU’s narratives and storytelling
context, however, are distinct from other series discussed in this chapter, as
is its contribution to introducing women’s stories to the cultural forum.Unlike
Strong Medicine, which uses stories about female patients to educate audiences
about a variety of ailments commonly suffered by women, the crimes
depicted in SVU serve only a limited educative function.Unfortunately, news
coverage often depicts crimes against women, and most women are well aware
160 redesigning women
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:13:40 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
of their frequent status as victims, which makes SVU’s repeated depiction of
these stories a less significant contribution. Additionally, SVU does not treat
social issues in the complex manner accomplished by Family Law. Where
Family Law depicts the judicial system struggling to negotiate children’s best
interest in custody situations or in establishing a face and context for the
crimes increasingly committed by American children, personalizing a rapist
or sexual predator is of more questionable utility.SVU has provided thoughtprovoking
stories about how those convicted of sex crimes bear an irremovable
stigma as an indication of the limitations of the U.S. penal system for rehabilitation
or retribution, but this is the exception rather than the norm.
Because of its special-victims focus, crimes suffered by women achieve more
regular and detailed examination than in “regular” police dramas such as Law
and Order or NYPD Blue. The stories SVU tells provide an important contribution
to dramatic stories about women; however, a detailed analysis of
the series is necessary to thoroughly assess its ideological significance.
The West Wing
The political drama The West Wing (1999–) indicates the limitations and possibilities
for female characters in mixed-sex ensembles. I include it here to
address how mixed-sex workplace narratives of the late 1990s and 2000s continue
to undermine female characters, even in contexts that superficially appear
supportive of their increased career status.21Women occupy two of eight
opening-credit cast positions in this series—press secretary C. J. Cregg (Allison
Janney) and assistant Donna Moss (Janel Moloney).22 Although her
status provides C. J. with some authority in the workplace, the dominance
of men in this space and occasional tertiary-level plot devices often undercut
her competency and indicate the subtle ways a series dominated by male
voices (in cast and writing) contains the female empowerment it wears as a
proud mark of its alleged progressive politics.23
The Seattle television columnist John Levesque highlighted a prime example
of the subtle narratives that diminish C. J.’s status (in a way that does
not motivate the narrative and is consequently unnecessary) and noted that
the The West Wing auteur Aaron Sorkin’s tendency for such depiction emerges
in his series Sports Night as well.24 He cites an episode in which C. J., as well
as the recurring character Ainsley Hayes (Emily Proctor), sit in wet paint, requiring
them to spend the episode (in which C. J. does a live broadcast from
the White House) walking around without pants. Other similar embarrassments
befall C. J.; perhaps the most significant case is a repeated device of
making her the last to know important information (a running joke that
makes it impossible to do her job well). In another unnecessary narrative mo-
Of Female Cops and Docs 161
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:13:40 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
ment, deputy chief of staff Josh Lyman (Bradley Whitford) returns a pair of
underwear to his assistant Donna after meeting with a foreign dignitary.
Donna met with the dignitary the previous day, and a pair of underwear fell
out of her pants, presumably after being caught in the pant leg from a previous
wearing.A promotion for the third season provides another example. In
an extended opening for the episode that addressed the events of September
11, each of the characters promotes an upcoming plotline. The male characters
address the grand jury investigation of the president and his reelection
bid, while Donna announces, “And I get a boyfriend.”
It is not my intention to create a hierarchy of workplace dramas that tell
women’s stories, but I use these examples from The West Wing to indicate
how a series that professes liberal politics and offers female characters narrative
space still undercuts and minimizes their professionalism. These devices
only can be identified by examining the stories told by the series; the characters’
status as single women in career roles provides no suggestion of the ambivalent
nature of their narrative construction. This series does offer important
representations and discourses: C. J.’s management of the press corps
and First Lady Bartlet’s (Stockard Channing) commitment to women and
women’s issues in her occasionally depicted duties provide significant perspectives
of female work.Additionally, the series regularized the role of Amy
Gardner (Mary-Louise Parker) in the fourth season, who was originally introduced
as the director of a NOW-like organization and openly identified
as a feminist.
This characterization and the stories surrounding Amy relative to the
other female characters further indicate the complexity of any one series’
contribution to stories told about women. In their rhetorical analysis of the
series, Trevor Parry-Giles and Shawn Parry-Giles note other moments that
both value and contain the female characters.25 The West Wing illustrates the
difficulty of assessing the progressive or regressive nature of stories told
about women and how crucial it is to utilize an appropriate unit of analysis.
This series can be seen in radically divergent ways, depending on which
episode one focuses upon, and this illustrates the need to consider the entirety
of the series. Additionally, the programming context must be considered
to understand the significance of its contradictory gender politics.
* * *
Unquestionably,many other workplace series could be mentioned here.Another
author may have attended to the stories told by 1990s series such as Law
and Order, NYPD Blue (ABC, 1993–2004), The X-Files (FOX, 1993–2002), E.R.
(NBC, 1994–), or The Practice (ABC, 1997–2004). As some of the top rated
162 redesigning women
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:13:40 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
dramas of this era, these series offered significant contributions to television
storytelling at the end of the century. Many of them depict a deliberately
crafted female competence, but the host of contemporaries illustrates that
such depictions are not exceptional.More to the point, these series offer little
innovation to the telling of stories about women, either about the central
female characters or those they encounter during their work as lawyers, detectives,
and doctors. The series I mention here offer some specific contribution:
Family Law nearly brings a reconfigured, female-centered workspace to
a mainstream broadcast network; Third Watch offers a rare working-class
character in dramatic stories about women as workers; SVU emphasizes stories
about the crimes women suffer to indicate some of the ways that they remain
structurally subordinated; and The West Wing serves as a caveat about
assuming professional characters necessarily yield politically progressive or
feminist representations and stories.
The workplace drama remains a crucial site for assessing dominant social
scripts and for charting the status of female audiences.Many of the narratives
discussed here indicate an increased acceptance of female characters in
workplace dramas in comparison with 1980s dramas, while the emergence
of workplaces dominated by women on Lifetime suggests the most unmistakable
gain. The fact that depictions of professional women are now less
openly contested by narrative circumstances may indicate a need for feminist
critics to reassess the portrayal of characters with public roles as inherently
progressive; the example of The West Wing reminds us of the complex
nature of representation and discourse and the need for critical interrogation
of apparently empowered characterizations.
Like the dramatic types considered in other chapters, the workplace dramas
also offer a distinct contribution to the expansion of stories told about
female characters in the period following the network era. Strong Medicine
and The Division illustrate the breadth of stories possible, whether through
the rarely heard working-class patients of Lu’s clinic or the complicated and
often melodramatic interpersonal relationships of The Division’s detectives.
Workplace series possess such a voluminous place in television history precisely
because so many stories can be told through their framework. Strong
Medicine and The Division reinvent this time-tested form by placing new emphasis
on stories about female characters or situations experienced by women.
Although the pursuit of work outside of the home functions as a structuring
presence across all the series considered in this book, the workplace
dramas tell different stories about women and work than can be found in
any other dramatic form. These two Lifetime series share features similar to
aspects of the comedic dramas and protagonist-centered family dramas, but
Of Female Cops and Docs 163
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:13:40 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
they are foremost about work and the events that transpire in work spaces.
This focus provides these series with a broad canvas for exploring the public
or work issues affecting women’s lives and how they negotiate them. These
series have the most natural narrative motivation for exploring gender issues
as part of a large systemic structure of power, rather than the containment
to the personal realm that limits most other types of series.
164 redesigning women
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:13:40 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms